## T ailor : Generating and Perturbing Text with Semantic Controls

Alexis Ross y Tongshuang Wu } Hao Peng } Matthew E. Peters y Matt Gardner y

y Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Seattle, WA, USA

}

Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington

Microsoft Semantic Machines, USA

{alexisr,matthewp}@allenai.org {wtshuang,hapeng}@cs.washington.edu mattgardner@microsoft.com

## Abstract

Controlled text perturbation is useful for evaluating and improving model generalizability. However, current techniques rely on training a model for every target perturbation, which is expensive and hard to generalize. We present T ailor , a semantically-controlled text generation system. T ailor builds on a pretrained seq2seq model and produces textual outputs conditioned on control codes derived from semantic representations. We craft a set of operations to modify the control codes, which in turn steer generation towards targeted attributes. These operations can be further composed into higher-level ones, allowing for flexible perturbation strategies. We demonstrate the e ectiveness of these perturbations in multiple applications. First, we use T ailor to automatically create high-quality contrast sets for four distinct natural language processing (NLP) tasks. These contrast sets contain fewer spurious artifacts and are complementary to manually annotated ones in their lexical diversity. Second, we show that T ailor perturbations can improve model generalization through data augmentation. Perturbing just 2% of training data leads to a 5.8-point gain on an NLI challenge set measuring reliance on syntactic heuristics.

## 1 Introduction

Semantic perturbation through controlled text generation modifies sentences to match certain target attributes, such as verb tense or sentiment ( e.g., positive ! negative ). It has been widely applied to a variety of tasks, e.g., changing text style (Reid and Zhong, 2021), mitigating dataset biases (Gardner et al., 2021), explaining model behaviors (Ross et al., 2021), and improving model generalization (Teney et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021). Existing e orts train task-specific generators, e.g., training

denotes equal contribution.

y Work done while at Allen Institute for AI

<!-- image -->

.

Figure 1: A compositional perturbation using T ai -lor . 1 Given (A) an original sentence, we abstract each span into a structured header that contains its semantic roles and keywords. Arguments to preserve are included in the context , along with blanks ( &lt;id\_*&gt; ) denoting where new generated text may be inserted. We specify desired perturbations by modifying each control code ( e.g., changing role LOCATIVE ✮ TEMPORAL in (B), verb tense past ✮ present, and patient keyword specificity complete ✮ partial). Given these perturbed control codes in the input (C), T ailor generates a new sentence (D) that reflects the desired perturbations.

a sentiment style transferer requires instances annotated with positive and negative labels (Madaan et al., 2020b). As a result, they require costly annotated data and re-training for every task of interest.

This work introduces T ailor , a system that supports application-agnostic perturbations. At its core is a controlled generator (§2) that flexibly generates outputs from target semantic attributes, which we represent through structured control codes in the inputs. As shown in Figure 1, these control codes build on the PropBank semantic analysis (Palmer et al., 2005) of the original sentence: For each argument span, the semantic role and keyword control codes specify the desired semantic content for the span at varying levels of granu- larity. To encourage control code following, we train the T ailor generator with unlikelihood training (Welleck et al., 2020) to penalize generations that are not aligned with designated control codes.

1 We opensource T ailor and release T ailor -generated contrast sets at https://github.com/allenai/tailor .

The use of semantic role control codes allows T ailor to perform fine-grained changes to individual arguments in a sentence ( e.g., one can change only the PATIENT in Figure 1). Instead of specifying a perturbation with a generic target property ( e.g., positive ✮ negative ), we can specify the linguistic transformation used to achieve the property ( e.g., changing sentiment through negation or antonym replacement). Making such fine-grained perturbations allows for more careful evaluation and improvement of models' language understanding (Kaushik et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021).

To highlight the perturbations facilitated by T ai -lor , we craft a list of primitive perturbation operations (§3) on inputs to the generator; these can be easily composed to achieve more complex perturbations. In Figure 1, T ailor transforms sentence A to D through a series of perturbations: syntactic rewriting (changing verb tense), then sentence expansion (extending 'the athlete'), and finally data recombination ( i.e., generating new text that contains 'in' but follows the TEMPORAL control). Compared to existing approaches that require training a separate model for every step or annotating a dataset that represents this transformation end-to-end, such compositions make T ailor more cost-e ective and generalizable. In fact, on nine fine-grained and compositional S tyle PTB perturbations (Lyu et al., 2021), T ailor achieves performance compatible with task-specific baselines, and even outperforms them on five transfers (§F).

T ailor 's flexible and human-readable control codes allow for broad, easily extendable applicability. We demonstrate its utility in evaluating and improving NLP model robustness, showing that T ailor can help replicate existing contrast sets on four diverse tasks. By abstracting manual perturbation types in prior work into perturbation strategies with T ailor , we can apply the changes to larger datasets while saving manual annotation e orts. Our analysis suggests that these contrast sets not only have high rates of validity, but also reduce spurious artifacts compared to the original evaluation datasets. In addition, T ailor -produced contrast sets complement human annotated ones in terms of lexical diversity: only 10% of their unique tokens overlap with manually created contrast sets. We also explore T ailor 's utility in data augmentation. We find that augmenting training data with just 2% of T ailor perturbations improves the robustness of natural language inference (NLI) models to inference heuristics, increasing performance on the HANSevaluation set (McCoy et al., 2019) by an average of 5.81 points and outperforming a previous syntactic augmentation method for NLI.

## 2 T ailor 's Controllable Generator

Here, we provide an overview of the T ailor generator. We first outline three types of controls (§2.1) that allow for specifying sentence meanings at varying granularity. Next, we explain how to embed them within inputs (§2.2) to the generator. We train the generator to follow control codes with unlikelihood training (§2.3).

## 2.1 Three Types of Controls

We use the following three types of controls to specify the shallow semantics, actual content, and ordering of various phrases in a sentence.

Semantic roles to denote shallow semantics. We rely on the PropBank semantic formalism (Palmer et al., 2005), as it provides wellestablished representations of meanings that are generalizable across di erent predicates and languages (Hajiˇ c et al., 2009). It represents sentence meanings with predicate-argument structures. Predicates ( e.g., 'comforted' in Figure 1) are usually evoked by verbs and reflect events ( what happened ). Arguments, usually spans of tokens, realize thematic roles of predicates; they include core arguments such as who did something ( e.g., 'the doctor' in Figure 1) and to whom ('the athlete'), as well as adjunct arguments like where something happened ('In the operation room') and how .

Keywords for steering the actual generated content of predicates and arguments. The keywords can be complete and fully specify the target text of a given span ( e.g., 'the doctor' for the AGENT in Table 1A), sparse and add no constraints beyond the semantic role ( e.g., * for LOCATIVE ), or partial and specify some of the target text ( e.g., 'athlete' for PATIENT ). As later shown in Table 3, these keyword controls are important for supporting a variety of perturbation strategies and applications.

Span ordering for determining how the thematic roles should be combined. We use predicate form to control the order of core arguments. For example, to distinguish 'the athlete was comforted by

Table 1: Example input / output formats for sentence 'In the operating room, the doctor comforted the athlete.' A-C show di erent input formats the generator accepts. Each input (§2.2) contains a header (in brackets), which contains control codes (semantic role / keyword) for each span, as well as a context , which includes both original text to preserve and blanks ( &lt;id\_*&gt; ) denoting where new text may be generated. The T ailor generator outputs text that infills the context's blanks with text following the header's control codes. The last input (N) is a negative sample used for unlikelihood training, as described in §2.3.

|    | Input                                                                                                                                                                      | Target Output                                                                                            | Description              |
|----|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------|
| A  | [ VERB + active + past : comfort &#124; AGENT + complete : the doctor &#124; PATIENT + partial : athlete &#124; LOCATIVE + sparse : *] <id_0> , <id_1> <id_2> <id_3> .     | [ LOCATIVE : In the operating room], [ AGENT : the doctor] [ VERB : comforted] [ PATIENT : the athlete]. | Mask all roles           |
| B  | [ VERB + active + past : comfort &#124; LOCATIVE + sparse : *] <id_0> , the doctor <id_1> <id_2> the athlete <id_3> .                                                      | [ LOCATIVE : In the operating room], the doctor [ VERB : comforted] the athlete.                         | Empty blanks             |
| C  | [ VERB + active + past : comfort &#124; LOCATIVE + sparse : *] <id_0> , the doctor <id_1> the athlete.                                                                     | [ LOCATIVE : In the operating room], the doctor [ VERB : comforted] the athlete.                         | Mask subset of arguments |
| N  | [ VERB + passive + present : comfort &#124; PATIENT + complete : the doctor &#124; AGENT + partial : athlete &#124; TEMPORAL + sparse : *] <id_0> , <id_1> <id_2> <id_3> . | [ TEMPORAL : In the operating room], [ PATIENT : the doctor] [ VERB : comforted] [ AGENT : the athlete]. | Negative sample          |

Predicate control: VERB + active + past : comfort

Primary predicate label (Always VERB )

Lemma (Any verb lemma)

Voice

( active , passive ) 2

Tense

( past , present , future )

Table 2: T ailor 's control codes . Primary controls build on predicate / argument labels, and others a ect the form and content of generations (More in §A.1).

<!-- image -->

the doctor' from the semantically equivalent 'the doctor comforted the athlete,' we target the former ordering through a passive control, and the latter through an active control. Additionally, we use the location of blank tokens ( &lt;id\_*&gt; in Figure 1 and Table 1) to determine the position of generated arguments (Wu et al., 2021) e.g., where 'in the operating room' appears in the generation.

## 2.2 Input Format Design

We integrate the aforementioned controls into the input format detailed in §A.1 and finetune seq2seq models to output corresponding full sentences.

As shown in Table 1, we start our input with a bracketed header , which contains a series of abstract control codes (Table 2) that denote the semantic role and keywords (content / specificity) to realize for each predicate and argument. For example, in Table 1A, the control codes for the predicate are ' VERB + active : past' and the agent argument are ' AGENT + complete : the doctor.' We map original semantic roles in PropBank to humanreadable labels ( i.e., ARG0 ! AGENT ) in order to leverage knowledge learned by pretrained models about roles' meanings (Paolini et al., 2021).

2 We use http://spacy.io/ for verb or POS detection.

After the header, we append the context , which consists of text to preserved and blanks specifying where new text should be generated. Given such inputs, we train our generator to output text augmented with control codes and brackets, which together specify which generated spans correspond to which controls. For example, in Table 1B, '[ LOCATIVE : In the operating room]' represents the target span of control codes ' LOCATIVE + sparse : *' and is generated at the location of blank &lt;id\_0&gt; right before the preserved context 'the doctor.'

We make three key design choices to allow T ai -lor to generate roles fluently even when the optimal ordering of roles is unknown ( e.g., when introducing a new argument). First, we explicitly separate signal about role placement ( e.g., blanks in the context) from the role's semantic controls ( e.g., control codes in the header) such that we can specify the target semantic attributes for a role without tying them to a specific target placement. Second, we order the control codes in the header in an input-independent way (see §A.1) to discourage the generator from learning to rely on their relative orders. Third, we insert extra empty blanks into the context ( e.g., &lt;id\_3&gt; in Table 1B) such that the T ailor generator can generate spans in the blank locations that result in the most fluent text.

With this flexibility in argument ordering comes the challenge of making strict controls on a single argument: Even if we only want to change verb tense, the generator may reorder other arguments.

To enable strict control over generations, which facilitates minimal perturbations (Ross et al., 2021), we further vary the number of arguments encoded in the header. As in Table 1C, our generator can take inputs that only mask a subset of arguments, such that, e.g., any changes on the LOCATIVE argument or VERB do not a ect the agent and patient.

## 2.3 Training

We finetune T5base (Ra el et al., 2020) on inputoutput pairs derived from gold semantic roles in OntoNotes 5.0 train (Table 1; Pradhan et al., 2013). 3 To train our generator to handle the different input formats described in §2.2, for each original input, we randomly sample the numbers of arguments to mask, number and placement of extra empty blanks, and keyword content / specificity for each role. See §A.2 for details.

Standard maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) is insu cient for training our generator to follow the controls, as there may exist signals beyond the given controls for the form of a generation. Consider the input: [ VERB + active + past : comfort | AGENT + partial : athlete | PATIENT + complete : the doctor] In the operating room, &lt;id\_0&gt; , &lt;id\_1&gt; &lt;id\_2&gt; . Agenerator trained with MLE may ignore controls AGENT and PATIENT and instead output text 'The doctor comforted the athlete' rather than 'The athlete comforted the doctor,' as the training data distribution may reflect that the former is more natural given context 'in the operation room.'

To encourage reliance on controls, we incorporate unlikelihood training (Welleck et al., 2020) to penalize generations that conflict with input controls. That is, besides Table 1A-C which are used for MLE, we also create 'negative' samples by randomly perturbing the control codes in our header (as in Table 1N, last row), such that most spans in the target output are not aligned with the control codes. We create up to three negative samples per input by randomly perturbing 1) verb voice / tense and primary controls for arguments, 2) keyword contents, and 3) keyword specificities (§A.1).Our final training data consists of 223K positive and 541K negative examples.

## 3 Creating Perturbations with T ailor

With T ailor , we can create diverse perturbations by modifying input controls. Given an original sentence, we transform it to an input for T ailor by extracting its semantic parses, 4 masking spans we wish to modify, and providing their control codes. Then, we modify the control codes in the input to generate perturbed sentences with T ailor , filtering out degenerate ones.

3 On par with T5, the blanks are in the form of &lt;extra\_id\_*&gt; ; we refer them as &lt;id\_*&gt; for simplicity.

Primitive perturbation operations. We provide an easily-extendable set of perturbation macros, which capture three common types of perturbations in prior work, shown in Table 3: First, syntactic rewriting primarily involves shu ing text to create paraphrases (Zhang et al., 2019) or adversarial examples (Iyyer et al., 2018). We implement such shu ing through operations that perturb predicate forms, move blank tokens, and swap keyword contents of arguments. Second, expansion and abstraction add or remove text fragments from a sentence (Wu et al., 2021). We recreate these through operations on keywords ( e.g., deletion). Finally, data recombination involves recombining existing textual fragments, within or across inputs (Akyürek et al., 2021; Andreas, 2020). With CHANGE\_CONTENT , we can integrate additional context ( e.g., from corresponding paragraphs in question answering tasks) into generations.

While our control codes are mostly derived from semantic roles, these primitive operations broadly cover both syntactic and semantic changes. They can also be used in conjunction with external knowledge bases to achieve targeted edits. 5 , or be composed to achieve more complex perturbation strategies as shown in §5, §6, and Appendix §F.

Filtering generations. We notice that the T ailor generator produces degenerate outputs for some inputs; we exclude these heuristically based on content and perplexity scores (see §C for details).

## 4 Intrinsic Evaluation

Following previous work (Wu et al., 2021; Ross et al., 2021), we evaluate T ailor generations on sentence likelihood, controllability, and closeness. 6

4 External semantic role labelers can be used when gold annotations are not available. Our experiments use the opensourced implementation of Shi and Lin (2019): demo. allennlp.org/semantic-role-labeling , with a test F1 of 86.5 on the Ontonotes 5.0 dataset (Pradhan et al., 2013).

5 For example, if combined with WordNet (Miller, 1998), T ailor perturbations may be able to incorporate a subset of natural logic (MacCartney and Manning, 2014): In Figure 1, we can create an entailment relationship by replacing doctor with its hyponym adult.

6 We omit the diversity evaluation in P olyjuice , as the keyword content control inherently impacts lexical diversity.

| (a) Syntactically controlled rewriting   | (a) Syntactically controlled rewriting                                                                         |
|------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Strategy                                 | CHANGE_VTENSE(present) ✮ [ VERB + active + past ✮ present : comfort]                                           |
| Perturb.                                 | In the operation room, the doctor comforts the athlete.                                                        |
| Strategy                                 | CHANGE_VVOICE(passive) ✮ [ VERB + active ✮ passive + past : comfort]                                           |
| Perturb.                                 | In...room, the athlete was comforted by the doctor.                                                            |
| Strategy                                 | CHANGE_IDX(4:0) ✮ <id_0> In the operation room <id_0>                                                          |
| Perturb.                                 | The doctor comforted the athlete in the operation room.                                                        |
| Strategy                                 | CORE(SWAP_CORE) ✮ [ AGENT + complete : the athlete ✮ doctor &#124; PATIENT + complete : the doctor ✮ athlete ] |
| Perturb.                                 | In the operation room, the athlete comforted the doctor.                                                       |

| (b) Sentence expansion and abstraction                          | (b) Sentence expansion and abstraction                                                      |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Strategy                                                        | LOCATIVE:CHANGE_SPEC(partial) ✮ [ LOCATIVE + complete ✮ partial : in the operation room]    |
| Perturb.                                                        | Under the dim light in the operation room, the doctor com- forted the athlete.              |
| Strategy                                                        | LOCATIVE:DELETE ✮ [ LOCATIVE + complete : in the operation room]                            |
| Perturb.                                                        | In the operation room, the doctor comforted the athlete.                                    |
| (c) Data recombination (with external labels and / or contents) | (c) Data recombination (with external labels and / or contents)                             |
| Strategy                                                        | CAUSE:CHANGE_CONTENT(because he was in pain) ✮ [ CAUSE + complete : because he was in pain] |
| Perturb.                                                        | In the operation room the doctor comforted the athlete because he was in pain.              |

Table 3: We design a list of primitive operations on input controls to guide perturbations with the T ailor generator.

|             | Closeness   | Closeness   | Closeness   | Pred. Controllability   | Pred. Controllability   | Pred. Controllability   | Arg. Controllability   | Arg. Controllability   | Arg. Controllability   |
|-------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Generator   | F 1         | Precision   | Recall      | Lemma                   | Tense                   | Voice                   | Role                   | Content                | Spec.                  |
| T ailor     | 64.3        | 66.5        | 73.4        | 74.3                    | 80.3                    | 81.6                    | 70.5                   | 64.5                   | 64.5                   |
| T ailor MLE | 58.5        | 59.5        | 68.6        | 72.2                    | 70.2                    | 76.1                    | 60.3                   | 45.1                   | 45.1                   |

Table 4: Intrinsic evaluation performance in percentage. T ailor generates perturbations that are close to the original sentence, while reasonably following all the controls specified in Table 2. Ablating unlikelihood training (T ailor MLE) hurts all metrics across the board.

We additionally evaluate T ailor 's unique ability to make fine-grained and compositional perturbations.

Metrics. Likelihood measures whether the generated text is grammatically correct and semantically meaningful. Following Ross et al. (2021), we ask whether perturbing a sentence with T ailor drastically changes its likelihood. Using a pretrained GPT-2, we compute language modeling losses for both the original and edited texts and report the ratio of edited / original. We desire a value of 1.0, which indicates equivalent losses for the two.

Controllability measures if the generator responds to the controls given in inputs. We rely on cycle consistency to evaluate the controls in Table 2: For a given generation, we check whether the predicted semantic roles from an SRL system match the control codes in the input ( e.g., whether 'in the midst of the earthquake' in Figure 1 gets detected with a TEMPORAL tag). Since SRL predictions can be noisy, we manually inspect a subset of 98 generated spans and verify that cycle consistency measures positively correlate with groundtruth controllability, with Matthews correlation coe cient = 0 : 49 (more details in §B).

Closeness captures whether the generated sentence involves only necessary changes. Since our generator takes controls at the argument level, we measure closeness with a weighted F1 score on the expected-to-change and actually-changed spans in the original sentence. We identify expected-to- change spans from perturbation operations; in Figure 1A, all spans should be changed except for agent 'the doctor.' Then, we deem a span actually edited if 50% tokens within a span are changed ( e.g., 'operation room' in LOCATIVE ). 7 We weigh spans by their lengths to arrive at the final F1 score.

Compositionality. We evaluate T ailor without any finetuning on the S tyle PTB benchmark (Lyu et al., 2021), which builds on the Penn Treebank and assesses both single , fine-grained transfers ( e.g., To Future Tense ) and compositional ones that concurrently edit multiple dimensions ( e.g., To Future Tense + Active To Passive ). We report mean BLEU scores and compare to the transfer-specific baselines reported in the S tyle PTB paper (See §F).

Data. We use S tyle PTB (Lyu et al., 2021) to evaluate compositionality. For other metrics, we perturb 1,000 randomly selected sentences from the OntoNotes 5.0 validation dataset, created the same way as negative samples during training (§A.1), and evaluate on these perturbations. 8

7 We empirically tune the threshold to be 50%, as it tolerates cases where we do not know exactly how the tokens should change ( e.g., when changing keyword sparsity, we do not know exactly how many new tokens should be generated; when changing semantic role controls, we may want to allow some tokens, like particles, to reoccur, while expecting others in the span to change.)

8 Because these perturbations are generated randomly, some result in sets of controls that are impossible to follow. Thus, these results represent a lower bound on T ailor 's controllability in downstream applications, for which strategies would be designed in a more principled, targeted manner, re-

## 4.1 Results

T ailor generates perturbations with a loss ratio of 0.982, indicating no notable change in language modeling loss after perturbation. As shown in Table 4, T ailor perturbations also tend to be close to the original sentence (F1 = 64 : 3%), with reasonably correct predicates (74.3%-81.6% of the time) and arguments (70.5% controllability on semantic roles and 64.5% on contents.) T ailor also demonstrates the ability to make compositional changes; it achieves results comparable to those of fine-tuned baselines on 8 / 9 tested transfers, and even outperforms the fine-tuned baseline on 5 of them (See §F and Table 11 for more details).

E ect of Unlikelihood Training. We compare T ailor with a baseline that is finetuned on T5 without unlikelihood training (called T ailor MLE in Table 4). Across all metrics, unlikelihood training outperforms T ailor MLE, with more controllable and closer perturbations (up to a 20% increase).

Modulating likelihood and closeness. As mentioned in §2.2, our input format supports modulating likelihood and closeness. We can increase closeness by only masking the arguments we want to perturb. To quantify this e ect, we randomly select a single argument to perturb for 1K sentences, but vary the number of masked arguments and number of inserted blanks. As desired, closeness is maximized when we mask only the argument we wish to perturb, as in Table 1B (with F 1 = 67 : 4%), whereas masking two extra arguments and inserting six extra blanks decreases closeness by 3% and 6%, respectively. On the other hand, we can prioritize likelihood (at the cost of closeness) by adding more blanks ( e.g., insert extra roles whose optimal locations are not known in advance). On another 1K sentences, we observe that adding six extra blanks increases the likelihood ratio from 0.93 to 0.95.

## 5 Contrast Set Creation

Manually creating contrast sets is expensive, e.g., Gardner et al. (2020) reported spending 10-15 minutes per perturbation for UD Parsing, whereas labeling existing data is more e cient (Wu et al., 2021). We show that T ailor can reduce human labor by automatically generating contrast set instances such that annotators only have to label them. We create T ailor -generated contrast sets for four tasks: boolean question answering (BoolQ: Clark et al., 2019), extractive QA (SQuAD: Rajpurkar et al., 2016), dependency tree parsing (UD English: Nivre et al., 2016), and temporal relation extraction (MATRES: Ning et al., 2018). 9

stricting the perturbations to result in more plausible sets of controls. See §B for more details.

## 5.1 Replicating Contrast Sets with T ailor

We take advantage of two key properties of T ai -lor : First, T ailor can make context-dependent changes. To recreate the BoolQ contrast set , we replicate Entity Change in Gardner et al. (2020) by replacing content keywords in questions with words in the paragraph that have the same semantic roles. For example, the paragraph in Table 5 indicates that 'his bride' can serve as an AGENT . Second, T ailor allows for compositonal changes. For example, as in Table 5, we change prepositional phrase (PP) attachments from noun ! verb to recreate the UD Parsing contrast set through the following composition of perturbation operations: remove the prepositional phrase from the patient keyword ( e.g., 'a diverse range of food at all prices and styles'), and introduce an adjunct argument with the preposition as partial keyword ( e.g., LOCATIVE 'at'). More details are in §D.1.

Contrast set validity. Weconsider our perturbation strategies successful if they help reduce human labor, i.e., a contrast set author can easily label or take inspiration from T ailor 's generations. Two authors sampled 100 original instances per task, inspected the top-K T ailor perturbations, and labeled an instance to be valid if there is at least one perturbation that changes the groundtruth answer while being fluent or requiring only minor fixes. 10 Table 5 shows that these T ailor perturbation strategies generate contrast sets with high validity. 11

## 5.2 Measuring Contrast Set Quality

We sanity check that T ailor -generated contrast sets can be used to reveal model errors. For example, a T5base model finetuned on BoolQ (with test accuracy 83%) has a performance of 65% on both T ailor -generated contrast sets and Gardner et al. (2020)'s (more in §D.2). However, this metric is only a proxy for the quality of evaluation data, since it can be made intentionally low if we generate all examples to target a known model error. Thus, we directly analyze the quality of T ailor contrast sets by measuring their lexical diversity and impact on token-level dataset artifacts , both of which play important roles in dataset debiasing.

9 T ailor -generated contrast sets are available at https: //github.com/allenai/tailor .

10 Because we exercised controls at di erent granularity ( i.e., UDrequires sourcing contents from the generator while others mostly require syntactic rewrites with predetermined content), we set k = 10 for UD-an upper bound for not overloading the human inspector-and k = 1 for other tasks.

11 T ailor achieves higher validity changing attachment from noun ! verb (82%) than verb ! noun (48%). Discussion in §D.

Table 5: A demonstration of how we recreate contrast sets. Using primitive operations in Table 3, T ailor supports context-aware and compositional changes. More examples ( e.g., changing PP attachment noun ! verb ) are in §D.

| Dataset & Task                                 | Dataset & Task                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Top-K validity                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| BoolQ contrast set (Gardner et al., 2020)      | BoolQ contrast set (Gardner et al., 2020)                                                                                                                                                                        | 82% (k = 1)                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Original                                       | Paragraph: ...his bride was revealed...Deadpool also discovers that he has a daughter...from a former flame. Question: does [ AGENT : Deadpool] [ VERB : have] [ PATIENT : a kid in the comics]? ( Answer: True) | Paragraph: ...his bride was revealed...Deadpool also discovers that he has a daughter...from a former flame. Question: does [ AGENT : Deadpool] [ VERB : have] [ PATIENT : a kid in the comics]? ( Answer: True) |
| Strategy                                       | Change entity ( AGENT:CHANGE_CONTENT(his bride) )                                                                                                                                                                | Change entity ( AGENT:CHANGE_CONTENT(his bride) )                                                                                                                                                                |
| Perturb.                                       | Question: does [ AGENT : his bride] [ VERB : have] [ PATIENT : a kid in the comics]? ( Answer: False)                                                                                                            | Question: does [ AGENT : his bride] [ VERB : have] [ PATIENT : a kid in the comics]? ( Answer: False)                                                                                                            |
| UD parsing contrast set (Gardner et al., 2020) | UD parsing contrast set (Gardner et al., 2020)                                                                                                                                                                   | 65% (k = 10)                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Original                                       | Sentence: [ AGENT : It] [ VERB : has] [ PATIENT : a diverse range of food at all prices and styles]. PP attachment : Noun ('at all prices and styles' attaches to 'food')                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Strategy                                       | Swap attachment from noun to verb ( noun ! verb ) PATIENT:CHANGE_CONTENT(a diverse range of food) LOCATIVE:CHANGE_CONTENT(at),CHANGE_SPEC(partial)                                                               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Perturb.                                       | Sentence: [ AGENT : It] [ VERB : has] [ PATIENT : a diverse range of food] [ LOCATIVE : at every turn]. PP attachment : Verb ('at every turn' attaches to 'has')                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| MATRES contrast set (Gardner et al., 2020)     | MATRES contrast set (Gardner et al., 2020)                                                                                                                                                                       | 71% (k = 1)                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| QA implication (Ribeiro et al., 2019)          | QA implication (Ribeiro et al., 2019)                                                                                                                                                                            | 81% (k = 1)                                                                                                                                                                                                      |

We measure lexical diversity on UD Parsing contrast sets because it involves su cient generation of new content. We compare T ailor - and humangenerated (Gardner et al., 2020) contrastive edits for the same 100 UD instances: we randomly sample one edit for each valid instance, heuristically extract modified PPs, and compute diversity as the ratio of unique to total new tokens in the PPs, filtering stopwords. For noun ! verb , the ratios are respectively 0.78 and 0.99 for T ailor and humans; for verb ! noun , both are 1.0. Thus, T ailor can help generate contrast sets without significantly reducing lexical diversity. Furthermore, T ailor outputs are distinguishable from humans': their unique tokens only overlap for &lt; 15% in verb ! noun , and 6%for noun ! verb , suggesting that T ailor can be used as a collaborative tool to diversify generation.

We also ask whether T ailor perturbations can reduce dataset artifacts. Gardner et al. (2021) devise a statistical test for dataset artifacts that builds on the argument that no simple feature ( e.g., single token) should show statistically significant correlation with labels in a language understanding problem. In Figure 2, we display the results: We plot the numbers of occurrences of each token against the conditional probability of the positive label given that token for both the BoolQ validation data (red dots) and the contrast created by T ailor (green dots). All tokens above or below the blue line show statistically significant correlation with positive labels and thus are considered dataset artifacts in Gardner et al. (2021)'s framework. While many tokens in the original BoolQ data exhibit significant correlations, most in the T ailor contrast set fall within the confidence region. Thus, T ailor can help create less evaluation data with fewer artifacts.

## 5.3 Discussion

Across the four tasks, we are able to replicate all perturbation strategies described by authors of the original contrast sets. While T ailor requires manual e ort to implement perturbation strategies, we believe the overall saved annotation effort outweighs this initial cost. First, once implemented, T ailor perturbations can be applied to large datasets without requiring additional annotation e ort. This large-scale applicability is especially useful for tasks whose single-instance annotation time is significant ( e.g., UD Parsing). Second, given that T ailor generations are distinguishable from human ones, they may have the potential to compensate for human omissions and thereby increase test case variety, which has been shown to be beneficial in prior work (Ribeiro et al., 2020); an interesting direction for future work would be to investigate this hypothesis in more detail. Third, the implementation overhead itself diminishes as more strategies are implemented. In BoolQ, while Gardner et al. (2020) manually created 'a diverse set of perturbations, including adjective, entity, and event changes' (see their Appendix B.9), these are

<!-- image -->

n

Figure 2: Dataset artifacts in original BoolQ validation set vs. contrast set created with T ailor using (Gardner et al., 2021)'s statistical test.

all a type of data recombination in Table 3, and we can unify their implementations with T ailor into the aforementioned keyword replacement in §5.1.

## 6 Data Augmentation

We explore whether T ailor can be combined with noisy automated labeling for data augmentation. For the Stanford Natural Language Inference (SNLI) task (Bowman et al., 2015), we show that data augmentation with T ailor perturbations increases model robustness to inference heuristics.

Min et al. (2020) find that augmenting SNLI training data by swapping hypotheses' subject / objects ( e.g., This collection contains 16 El Grecos. 9 16 El Grecos contain this collection ) improves performance on HANS, a challenge set for diagnosing fallible syntactic heuristics in NLI models (McCoy et al., 2019). Following this, we use T ailor to perturb hypotheses with the SWAP\_CORE operation such that original hypothesis ! premise and perturbed hypothesis ! new hypothesis .

We finetune R o BERT a -base (Liu et al., 2019) on di erent training datasets: original SNLI train data (unaugmented baseline), SNLI train augmented with Min et al. (2020) (augmented baseline, referred to as Syntactic Perturb. in Table 6), and SNLI train augmented with T ailor perturbations. We augment 2% of SNLI train. 12 For each subset, we train 20 models with di erent random seeds. We evaluate each classifier on the in-domain SNLI test set and the out-of-domain HANS test set. 13

As shown in Table 6, augmentation with T ailor leads to 5.8-point gain on HANS overall, HANS and a 29.2 -point gain on 'non-entailment,' compared to the unaugmented baseline. The improvements are significant, with t = 6 : 42, p &lt; 10 3

12 Weaugment the 549,367 SNLI train instances with 10,987 new instances. See §E for more details.

13 For HANS, we follow the standard practice and collapse neutral and contradiction predictions to non-entailment .

Table 6: T ailor augmentations lead to statistically significant gains on the HANS challenge set, without decreasing in-domain accuracy.

|                      |      | HANS Subset   | HANS Subset   | HANS Subset   |
|----------------------|------|---------------|---------------|---------------|
| Training Data        | SNLI | All           | Entail.       | Non-entail.   |
| SNLI Train           | 91.1 | 64.7          | 99.0          | 30.5          |
| + Syntactic Perturb. | 91.0 | 67.5          | 95.8          | 39.2          |
| + T ailor Perturb.   | 91.1 | 70.5          | 81.3          | 59.7          |

using Student's t-test. Thus, T ailor perturbations decrease reliance on the lexical-overlap-based inference heuristic for NLI.

Furthermore, T ailor outperforms Syntactic Perturb. , an augmented baseline designed specifically for NLI. We hypothesize that although they create augmentations through similar transformations, Min et al. (2020)'s approach is limited to inputs with specific syntactic configurations, whereas T ai -lor 's SWAP\_CORE argument is applicable to any AGENT and PATIENT arguments. Thus, T ailor is useful for improving model robustness - more so than template-based approaches.

## 7 Related Work

Controllable text generation has been widely used to influence various properties of generated text for text summarization (Peng et al., 2019), data augmentation (Lee et al., 2021), style transfer (Reid and Zhong, 2021; Madaan et al., 2020a), adversarial example generation (Iyyer et al., 2018), etc. Most generators take simple controls like tense (Hu et al., 2017), topic (Keskar et al., 2019), or sentiment polarity (Dathathri et al., 2020), which underspecify desired transformations. In contrast, T ailor concretizes otherwise sparse controls ( e.g., we can specify making a sentence more negative through negation .) Recent works incorporating syntactic structures for paraphrasing (Iyyer et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2019; Bao et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2021; Huang and Chang, 2021) or discrete semantic signatures for diverse generation (Weir et al., 2020) are similar to T ailor in their high-dimensional specification.

Also closely related are methods that reconstruct sentences from structured semantic representations. The most similar related work is InFillmore (Ou et al., 2021), which uses semantic representations derived from FrameNet with constrained decoding to guide generation. While InFillmore tunes the higher-level semantics of a sentence, T ailor 's semantic controls incorporate fine-grained information about the location and semantics of tex- tual phrases; in addition, we demonstrate two new applications for semantically-guided generation, contrast set generation and data augmentation. Abstract Meaning Representation (Banarescu et al., 2013; Mager et al., 2020) is an alternative semantic representation worth exploring for data perturbation, as it may further enable controls on entity recursions (Damonte and Cohen, 2019), though expressing such relationships is nontrivial.

Controlled generators have also been successfully used to perturb text for model training, evaluation, and explanation. They usually rely on application-specific labels (Ross et al., 2021; Madaan et al., 2020b; Sha et al., 2021; Akyürek et al., 2021) or require pairs of original and perturbed sentences (Wu et al., 2021), which are expensive to generalize.

Also related are the creation of minimally edited datasets, either through manual rewriting (Gardner et al., 2020; Kaushik et al., 2020), or creating perturbation templates (Andreas, 2020; Li et al., 2020; Ribeiro et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2019); T ailor reduces the human e orts these studies require.

## 8 Discussion

We propose T ailor , a system that enables taskagnostic, complex and context-aware perturbations. T ailor demonstrates that it is possible to drive fine-grained perturbations with semantic features directly derived from an instance. Crucially, it shows that incorporating classical linguistic structures with modern large-scale neural architectures is feasible: With the help of modern pretrained large models, PropBank-style shallow semantic representations can help steer generation towards desired meanings.

Factors that a ect T ailor 's capability. Though broadly applicable, T ailor 's controllability and effectiveness vary for di erent inputs. First, creating automatic perturbations with T ailor requires external SRL predictors, which can be noisy on rare semantic roles or low-resource languages. 14 Empirically, this did not seem to be a bottleneck, as exposing biases in downstream tasks does not usually require rarity at the semantic role level ( e.g., testing syntactic heuristics in NLI requires swapping only agents and patients). However, perturbing more challenging linguistic phenomena may re- quire careful SRL predictor augmentation or even manual semantic role annotation.

14 Note that while T ailor is designed to be language agnostic, we only evaluated it on English.

We also notice T ailor can sometimes produce degenerate outputs. We hypothesize that this is a byproduct of unlikelihood training i.e., the generator learns to reduce the likelihood of negative sequences by generating tokens that are very unlikely to appear in natural text. Generation hyperparameters ( e.g., number of beams) can reduce the number of degenerate outputs. While we perform unlikelihood training at the sequence level, future work can investigate the e ect of penalizing generation at the level of tokens or spans, which may provide finer-grained signals for which spans should be considered unlikely, as well as more strategically balancing positive and negative samples.

Extending T ailor . We believe the T ailor generator is well-suited for controlled generation tasks beyond the perturbation-based tasks we explore. Given key entities or arguments as keywords and fully masked contexts, we envision T ailor can help generate arguments (Schiller et al., 2021), compositionally augment data (Akyürek et al., 2021), or generate captions (Chen et al., 2020). In particular, as shown in §5, T ailor 's human-readable controls can support humans on data curation, which suggests that designing NLP models for augmenting human capabilities is a promising direction.

The design of controls is also worthy of in-depth exploration. As mentioned in §7, AMR might be an alternative for semantic representation, if our primary goal is to express non-sequential relations. On the other hand, dependency parsing labels are useful for syntactic changes; future work may try to balance syntactic and semantic controls.

Having noted these opportunities, we believe T ailor is already a powerful tool for perturbation, particularly for tasks where compositional changes are required. T ailor is opensource, and available at https://github.com/allenai/tailor .

## Acknowledgements

Wethank Ana Marasovi´ c, William Merrill, Thomas R. McCoy, and Daniel S. Weld for their helpful suggestions, and the anonymous reviewers for their feedback. Hao Peng is supported by a Google Fellowship.

## References

Ekin Akyürek, Afra Feyza Akyürek, and Jacob Andreas. 2021. Learning to recombine and resample data for compositional generalization. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021 . OpenReview.net.

Jacob Andreas. 2020. Good-enough compositional data augmentation. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 7556-7566, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Laura Banarescu, Claire Bonial, Shu Cai, Madalina Georgescu, Kira Gri tt, Ulf Hermjakob, Kevin Knight, Philipp Koehn, Martha Palmer, and Nathan Schneider. 2013. Abstract Meaning Representation for sembanking. In Proceedings of the 7th Linguistic Annotation Workshop and Interoperability with Discourse , pages 178-186, Sofia, Bulgaria. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Yu Bao, Hao Zhou, Shujian Huang, Lei Li, Lili Mou, Olga Vechtomova, Xin-yu Dai, and Jiajun Chen. 2019. Generating sentences from disentangled syntactic and semantic spaces. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 6008-6019, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts, and Christopher D. Manning. 2015. A large annotated corpus for learning natural language inference. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 632-642, Lisbon, Portugal. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Mingda Chen, Qingming Tang, Sam Wiseman, and Kevin Gimpel. 2019. Controllable paraphrase generation with a syntactic exemplar. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 5972-5984, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Shizhe Chen, Qin Jin, Peng Wang, and Qi Wu. 2020. Say as you wish: Fine-grained control of image caption generation with abstract scene graphs. In 2020 IEEE / CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2020, Seattle, WA, USA, June 13-19, 2020 , pages 9959-9968. IEEE.

- Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, Ming-Wei Chang, Tom Kwiatkowski, Michael Collins, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BoolQ: Exploring the surprising di culty of natural yes / no questions. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 2924-2936, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Marco Damonte and Shay B. Cohen. 2019. Structural neural encoders for AMR-to-text generation. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 3649-3658, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Sumanth Dathathri, Andrea Madotto, Janice Lan, Jane Hung, Eric Frank, Piero Molino, Jason Yosinski, and Rosanne Liu. 2020. Plug and play language models: A simple approach to controlled text generation. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020 . OpenReview.net.

Matt Gardner, Yoav Artzi, Victoria Basmov, Jonathan Berant, Ben Bogin, Sihao Chen, Pradeep Dasigi, Dheeru Dua, Yanai Elazar, Ananth Gottumukkala, Nitish Gupta, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Gabriel Ilharco, Daniel Khashabi, Kevin Lin, Jiangming Liu, Nelson F. Liu, Phoebe Mulcaire, Qiang Ning, Sameer Singh, Noah A. Smith, Sanjay Subramanian, Reut Tsarfaty, Eric Wallace, Ally Zhang, and Ben Zhou. 2020. Evaluating models' local decision boundaries via contrast sets. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 , pages 1307-1323, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Matt Gardner, Joel Grus, Mark Neumann, Oyvind Tafjord, Pradeep Dasigi, Nelson F. Liu, Matthew Peters, Michael Schmitz, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2018. AllenNLP: A deep semantic natural language processing platform. In Proceedings of Workshop for NLP Open Source Software (NLP-OSS) , pages 16, Melbourne, Australia. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Matt Gardner, William Merrill, Jesse Dodge, Matthew Peters, Alexis Ross, Sameer Singh, and Noah A. Smith. 2021. Competency problems: On finding and removing artifacts in language data. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 1801-1813, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jan Hajiˇ c, Massimiliano Ciaramita, Richard Johansson, Daisuke Kawahara, Maria Antònia Martí, Lluís Màrquez, Adam Meyers, Joakim Nivre, Sebastian Padó, Jan Štˇ epánek, Pavel Straˇ nák, Mihai Surdeanu, Nianwen Xue, and Yi Zhang. 2009. The CoNLL2009 shared task: Syntactic and semantic dependencies in multiple languages. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL 2009): Shared Task , pages 1-18, Boulder, Colorado. Association for Computational Linguistics.

- [Chris Hokamp and Qun Liu. 2017. Lexically constrained decoding for sequence generation using grid beam search. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1141)
- Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1535-1546, Vancouver, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Zhiting Hu, Zichao Yang, Xiaodan Liang, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Eric P. Xing. 2017. Toward controlled generation of text. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2017, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 6-11 August 2017 , volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 1587-1596. PMLR.
- Kuan-Hao Huang and Kai-Wei Chang. 2021. Generating syntactically controlled paraphrases without using annotated parallel pairs. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume , pages 1022-1033, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Mohit Iyyer, John Wieting, Kevin Gimpel, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2018. Adversarial example generation with syntactically controlled paraphrase networks. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers) , pages 1875-1885, New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Divyansh Kaushik, Eduard H. Hovy, and Zachary Chase Lipton. 2020. Learning the di erence that makes A di erence with counterfactuallyaugmented data. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020 . OpenReview.net.
- N. Keskar, Bryan McCann, L. Varshney, Caiming Xiong, and R. Socher. 2019. Ctrl: A conditional transformer language model for controllable generation. ArXiv , abs / 1909.05858.
- Ashutosh Kumar, Kabir Ahuja, Raghuram Vadapalli, and Partha Talukdar. 2020. Syntax-guided controlled generation of paraphrases. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 8:329-345.
- Kenton Lee, Kelvin Guu, Luheng He, Timothy Dozat, and Hyung Won Chung. 2021. Neural data augmentation via example extrapolation. ArXiv , abs / 2102.01335.
- Chuanrong Li, Lin Shengshuo, Zeyu Liu, Xinyi Wu, Xuhui Zhou, and Shane Steinert-Threlkeld. 2020. Linguistically-informed transformations (LIT): A method for automatically generating contrast sets. In Proceedings of the Third BlackboxNLP Workshop on Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP , pages 126-135, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
- Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach.
- Yiwei Lyu, Paul Pu Liang, Hai Pham, Eduard Hovy, Barnabás Póczos, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and LouisPhilippe Morency. 2021. StylePTB: A compositional benchmark for fine-grained controllable text style transfer. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages 2116-2138, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Bill MacCartney and Christopher D Manning. 2014. Natural logic and natural language inference. In Computing meaning , pages 129-147. Springer.
- Aman Madaan, Amrith Setlur, Tanmay Parekh, Barnabas Poczos, Graham Neubig, Yiming Yang, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Alan W Black, and Shrimai Prabhumoye. 2020a. Politeness transfer: A tag and generate approach. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 1869-1881, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Nishtha Madaan, Inkit Padhi, Naveen Panwar, and Diptikalyan Saha. 2020b. Generate your counterfactuals: Towards controlled counterfactual generation for text. ArXiv preprint , abs / 2012.04698.
- Manuel Mager, Ramón Fernandez Astudillo, Tahira Naseem, Md Arafat Sultan, Young-Suk Lee, Radu Florian, and Salim Roukos. 2020. GPT-too: A language-model-first approach for AMR-to-text generation. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 1846-1852, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Tom McCoy, Ellie Pavlick, and Tal Linzen. 2019. Right for the wrong reasons: Diagnosing syntactic heuristics in natural language inference. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 3428-3448, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- George A Miller. 1998. WordNet: An electronic lexical database . MIT press.
- Junghyun Min, R. Thomas McCoy, Dipanjan Das, Emily Pitler, and Tal Linzen. 2020. Syntactic data augmentation increases robustness to inference heuristics. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 2339-2352, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Qiang Ning, Hao Wu, and Dan Roth. 2018. A multiaxis annotation scheme for event temporal relations. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1318-1328, Melbourne, Australia. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marne e, Filip Ginter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajiˇ c, Christopher D. Manning, Ryan McDonald, Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo, Natalia Silveira, Reut Tsarfaty, and Daniel Zeman. 2016. Universal Dependencies v1: A multilingual treebank collection. In Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC'16) , pages 1659-1666, Portorož, Slovenia. European Language Resources Association (ELRA).
- Jiefu Ou, Nathaniel Weir, Anton Belyy, Felix Yu, and Benjamin Van Durme. 2021. InFillmore: Frameguided language generation with bidirectional context. In Proceedings of *SEM 2021: The Tenth Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics , pages 129-142, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury. 2005. The Proposition Bank: An annotated corpus of semantic roles. Computational Linguistics , 31(1):71-106.

Giovanni Paolini, Ben Athiwaratkun, Jason Krone, Jie Ma, Alessandro Achille, Rishita Anubhai, Cícero Nogueira dos Santos, Bing Xiang, and Stefano Soatto. 2021. Structured prediction as translation between augmented natural languages. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021 . OpenReview.net.

- Hao Peng, Ankur Parikh, Manaal Faruqui, Bhuwan Dhingra, and Dipanjan Das. 2019. Text generation with exemplar-based adaptive decoding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 2555-2565, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Sameer Pradhan, Alessandro Moschitti, Nianwen Xue, Hwee Tou Ng, Anders Björkelund, Olga Uryupina, Yuchen Zhang, and Zhi Zhong. 2013. Towards robust linguistic analysis using OntoNotes. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning , pages 143-152, Sofia, Bulgaria. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Colin Ra el, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2020. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-totext transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 21(140):1-67.
- Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. 2016. SQuAD: 100,000 + questions for machine comprehension of text. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 2383-2392, Austin, Texas. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Machel Reid and Victor Zhong. 2021. LEWIS: Levenshtein editing for unsupervised text style transfer. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021 , pages 3932-3944, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Carlos Guestrin, and Sameer Singh. 2019. Are red roses red? evaluating consistency of question-answering models. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 6174-6184, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Tongshuang Wu, Carlos Guestrin, and Sameer Singh. 2020. Beyond accuracy: Behavioral testing of NLP models with CheckList. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 49024912, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Alexis Ross, Ana Marasovi´ c, and Matthew Peters. 2021. Explaining NLP models via minimal contrastive editing (MiCE). In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021 , pages 3840-3852, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Benjamin Schiller, Johannes Daxenberger, and Iryna Gurevych. 2021. Aspect-controlled neural argument generation. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages 380-396, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Lei Sha, Patrick Hohenecker, and Thomas Lukasiewicz. 2021. Controlling text edition by changing answers of specific questions. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021 , pages 1288-1299, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Shikhar Sharma, Layla El Asri, Hannes Schulz, and Jeremie Zumer. 2017. Relevance of unsupervised metrics in task-oriented dialogue for evaluating natural language generation. ArXiv preprint , abs / 1706.09799.
- Peng Shi and Jimmy Lin. 2019. Simple bert models for relation extraction and semantic role labeling. ArXiv preprint , abs / 1904.05255.
- Jiao Sun, Xuezhe Ma, and Nanyun Peng. 2021. AESOP: Paraphrase generation with adaptive syntactic control. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 5176-5189, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Damien Teney, Ehsan Abbasnedjad, and Anton van den Hengel. 2020. Learning what makes a di erence from counterfactual examples and gradient supervision. ArXiv preprint , abs / 2004.09034.
- Chantal van Son, Oana Inel, Roser Morante, Lora Aroyo, and Piek Vossen. 2018. Resource interoperability for sustainable benchmarking: The case of events. In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018) , Miyazaki, Japan. European Language Resources Association (ELRA).
- Nathaniel Weir, João Sedoc, and Benjamin Van Durme. 2020. COD3S: Diverse generation with discrete semantic signatures. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 5199-5211, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Sean Welleck, Ilia Kulikov, Stephen Roller, Emily Dinan, Kyunghyun Cho, and Jason Weston. 2020. Neural text generation with unlikelihood training. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020 . OpenReview.net.
- Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander Rush. 2020. Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 38-45, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Tongshuang Wu, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Je rey Heer, and Daniel Weld. 2019. Errudite: Scalable, reproducible, and testable error analysis. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 747-763, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Tongshuang Wu, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Je rey Heer, and Daniel Weld. 2021. Polyjuice: Generating counterfactuals for explaining, evaluating, and improving models. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 6707-6723, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Yuan Zhang, Jason Baldridge, and Luheng He. 2019. PAWS: Paraphrase adversaries from word scrambling. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 1298-1308, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguistics.

## Appendices

## A T ailor Generator Details

## A.1 Input and Output Formats

All headers in inputs to the T ailor generator begin with predicate controls, followed by core argument controls (first AGENT , then PATIENT ), and then randomly ordered adjunct argument controls ( LOCATIVE , TEMPORAL , etc.). Secondary controls are always given in the order of control code + voice + tense:lemma for verbs and control code + keyword specificity:keyword content for arguments. We also blank the auxiliary verbs of the predicate in an input, using spacy to detect them. We exclude discontinuous arguments ( e.g., those with raw SRL labels B-C-* ), as well as those with referents ( e.g., those with raw SRL labels B-R-* ), from input headers. We map ARG0 ! AGENT and ARG1 ! PATIENT . For other numbered arguments, we create human-readable labels by using argument functions included in the PropBank frame for the given predicate (Palmer et al., 2005).

On the output side, we ask the model to generate the full sentence (Table 1). We add the semantic roles for all the generated arguments, to help the generator build explicit mappings between the input control codes and the output spans - this can be important when the input codes are ambiguous ( e.g., a TEMPORAL argument and a LOCATIVE argument that both have keywords 'in'). To use generations in downstream applications, we remove these control codes to obtain cleaned outputs using regular expression matching.

## A.2 Training details

Training inputs. During training, we randomly select, with equal probabilities, whether to mask all arguments or a subset. If a subset, we uniformly select the proportion of arguments to mask. To determine the number of extra blanks, we uniformly select a value less than 10 and set the number of blanks to be the maximum of that selected value and the number of arguments to mask. Any extra blanks ( i.e., remaining after masking arguments) are inserted between subtrees of the predicate.

We also randomly select keyword contents and keyword specificities. For each argument span, we extract, using spacy , four keyword types from the span: noun chunks , random subtrees , exact keywords, and prefixes . For prefixes, we uniformly select a number of tokens to include as the keyword (from 1 to the entire span). Once we extract all keyword candidates, we create corresponding keyword specificities: A keyword is complete if it contains all tokens in the original span, partial if it contains at least all but 5 tokens, and sparse otherwise. Then, we uniformly select a keyword content / specificity pair for each span from the set of keyword candidates (including the * symbol). 15

To generate unlikelihood samples, we use three perturbation strategies on inputs: 1) Change semantic roles by swapping thematic role control codes (agent / patient), changing adjunct argument control codes to a uniformly selected other adjunct control code, and changing verb tense / voice. We swap verb tense / voice because the control code VERB does not have natural candidate swaps, given that predicates are the building block for semantic parses. We also swap the control codes in the target output. 2) Change keyword contents by replacing verb lemmas and keywords for both the predicate and all arguments. To make content swaps, we first gather the most commonly occurring keyword contents for each argument and predicate in Ontonotes 5.0 train, extracted according to the same process as described above for creating training inputs. For each primary control code and keyword specificity ( e.g., TEMPORAL+partial ), we store the 15 most commonly occurring keyword contents. To create the negative inputs, for each span, we uniformly sample from these stored keywords given the span's control code and keyword specificity. This perturbation is designed to discourage the generator from ignoring the keyword content and merely generating commonly occurring text for particular semantic roles. 3) Change keyword specificities by uniformly selecting a di erent specificity. We weight each unlikelihood sample equally, with a reward of -1 (vs + 1 for positive samples).

Hyperparameters. We train the T ailor generator using Transformers (Wolf et al., 2020) for 10

15 Because of how keywords are sampled, we notice that the generator is sensitive to the case of keyword contents. For example, if the keyword for a temporal span is In 1980 instead of in 1980 , T ailor is biased towards generating it at the beginning of the sentence. We hypothesize that because some of the keywords we sample during training are cased ( e.g., exact will lead to a cased keyword for a capitalized span beginning a sentence), the generator learns a bias towards generating spans with uppercase keyword at the beginning of the sentence. In applying the generator to perturbations, the case of keyword contents can be used to manipulate the order of generated roles when a certain order of generated contents is desired; otherwise, uncased keywords can be used.

epochs with early stopping. We use batch size 4 and default values for other parameters (learning rate of 5e-5, Adam optimizer).

## B Intrinsic Evaluation Details

E ectiveness of cycle consistency. To evaluate to what extent cycle consistency reflects true controllability, we conducted additional manual annotation on role-following. We sampled 25 sentences from the Ontonotes 5.0 development set, transformed them into inputs with varying numbers of masked arguments and blank tokens, and created up to two perturbed inputs per sentence by randomly replacing their blanked adjunct arguments with other candidate semantic roles (using CHANGE\_TAG ). The candidate roles were extracted from the frameset for each predicate verb. We also changed the keyword specificity to SPARSE , to make these role swaps more plausible.

We collected T ailor and T ailor MLE generations from both the original and perturbed inputs, and one author manually validated the generated span for each specified argument (98 in total). Our annotations were following or not following the control ( i.e., the span matches / does not match the designated semantic role), or the set of controls can be impossible to follow if the human annotator could not think of any generation that would satisfy the control codes, due to a conflict between the role, keywords, and blank placement. We then computed the Matthews correlation coe cient (MCC) between the controllability of the role label as measured by the SRL predictor with the gold controllability annotations for the subset of roles without annotation impossible . The MCCs are 0.49 and 0.51 for T ailor MLE and T ailor , respectively, suggesting that the cycle consistency measures positively correlate with true controllability measures.

Additionally, we measure to what extent the controllability measures from cycle consistency correlate with whether a set of controls is impossible to follow. The MCCs are -0.33 for both T ailor and T ailor MLE ; thus, incorrect role-following as measured by cycle consistency is positively correlated with controls that are impossible to follow. 14 / 98 instances were manually annotated as having impossible-to-follow controls, suggesting that a nontrivial proportion of the generations for which our intrinsic evaluation measures in §4 found to be unaligned with designated role control codes may be explained by impossible-to-follow controls.

## C Degenerate Outputs

We observe that T ailor produces degenerate outputs for some inputs, as shown in Table 8. We hypothesize that this is a byproduct of unlikelihood training: The generator may learn to reduce the likelihood of negative sequences by generating tokens that are very unlikely to appear in natural text. Certain generation hyperparameters, such as the number of beams, can reduce the number of degenerate outputs. While we perform unlikelihood training at the sequence level, future work can investigate the e ect of penalizing generation at the level of tokens or spans, which may provide finer-grained signals for which spans should be considered unlikely, as well as more strategically balancing positive and negative samples.

Filtering. To exclude degenerations when using T ailor generations in downstream applications, we employ a combination of heuristics and perplexitybased filtering. As shown by the examples in Table 8, degenerate outputs are easy to detect: We can simply search for whether the output includes 'sanatate.' We also use cuto s in perplexity scores computed with GPT-2 to filter degenerations, as degenerations have significantly lower perplexities than non-degenerate outputs: For generations for 300 randomly sampled validation inputs, the T ailor generator produced generations with a mean perplexity of -346.46 for degenerate outputs (12 / 300) compared to -86.747 for others.

## D Contrast Set Details (§5)

## D.1 Perturbation Strategies

In Table 7, we illustrate our perturbation strategies for creating contrast sets. Besides BoolQ, already introduced in §5, the Matres contrast set Gardner et al. (2020) relies on within-sentence context: As a task that requires detecting and changing the temporal order of two verbs, our perturbations heavily rely on their syntactic relationships. For example, to change the appearance order of verbs in text (as described in (Gardner et al., 2020)), we would take the parent verb as the base predicate, and MOVE the text span containing the child verb.

For QA implication (Ribeiro et al., 2019), we combine T ailor with semantic heuristics: by defining mappings between WH-words and answer types ( e.g., 'who' and 'the Huguenots'), we can easily create new questions about di erent targets.

| Dataset & Task                                                 | Dataset & Task                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | Top-K validity                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| MATRES contrast set (Gardner et al., 2020)                     | MATRES contrast set (Gardner et al., 2020)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | 71% (k = 1)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| Original                                                       | Sentence: Volleyball is a popular sport in the area, and [ AGENT : more than 200 people] would be [ VERB : watching] [ PATIENT : the game], the chief said. Order: watching happens after said                                                                                                                             | Sentence: Volleyball is a popular sport in the area, and [ AGENT : more than 200 people] would be [ VERB : watching] [ PATIENT : the game], the chief said. Order: watching happens after said                                                                                                                             |
| Perturbation strategy: Change tense                            | Perturbation strategy: Change tense                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Perturbation strategy: Change tense                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Edits                                                          | VERB:CHANGE_VFORM(past) ! [ VERB + active + present ✮ past : watch] Volleyball is...200 people <id_0> the game, the chief said.                                                                                                                                                                                            | VERB:CHANGE_VFORM(past) ! [ VERB + active + present ✮ past : watch] Volleyball is...200 people <id_0> the game, the chief said.                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Perturbed                                                      | Sentence: Volleyball is a popular sport in the area, and [ AGENT : more than 200 people] [ VERB : watched] [ PATIENT : the game], the chief said. Order: watched happens before said                                                                                                                                       | Sentence: Volleyball is a popular sport in the area, and [ AGENT : more than 200 people] [ VERB : watched] [ PATIENT : the game], the chief said. Order: watched happens before said                                                                                                                                       |
| Perturbation strategy: Change order                            | Perturbation strategy: Change order                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Perturbation strategy: Change order                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Edits                                                          | PATIENT:MOVE ! [ VERB + active + past : say &#124; AGENT + complete : Volleyball...the game] <id_0> , the chief said <id_0> .                                                                                                                                                                                              | PATIENT:MOVE ! [ VERB + active + past : say &#124; AGENT + complete : Volleyball...the game] <id_0> , the chief said <id_0> .                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Perturbed                                                      | Sentence: [ AGENT : the chief] [ VERB : said] [ PATIENT : Volleyball is a popular sport in the area, and more than 200 people would be watching the game]. Order: said happens before watch                                                                                                                                | Sentence: [ AGENT : the chief] [ VERB : said] [ PATIENT : Volleyball is a popular sport in the area, and more than 200 people would be watching the game]. Order: said happens before watch                                                                                                                                |
| BoolQ contrast set (Gardner et al., 2020)                      | BoolQ contrast set (Gardner et al., 2020)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | 82% (k = 1)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| Original                                                       | Paragraph: ...his bride was revealed in the webcomic...Deadpool also discovers that he has a daughter by the name of Eleanor, from a former flame of Deadpool named Carmelita.                                                                                                                                             | Paragraph: ...his bride was revealed in the webcomic...Deadpool also discovers that he has a daughter by the name of Eleanor, from a former flame of Deadpool named Carmelita.                                                                                                                                             |
| Perturbation strategy: Change entity                           | Perturbation strategy: Change entity                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | Perturbation strategy: Change entity                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Edits                                                          | AGENT:CHANGE_CONTENT(his bride); ! [ VERB + active + present : have &#124; AGENT + complete : Deadpool ✮ his bride] does <id_0> <id_1> a kid in the comics?                                                                                                                                                                | AGENT:CHANGE_CONTENT(his bride); ! [ VERB + active + present : have &#124; AGENT + complete : Deadpool ✮ his bride] does <id_0> <id_1> a kid in the comics?                                                                                                                                                                |
| Perturbed                                                      | Q: does [ AGENT : his bride] [ VERB : have] [ PATIENT : a kid in the comics]? ( A: False)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | Q: does [ AGENT : his bride] [ VERB : have] [ PATIENT : a kid in the comics]? ( A: False)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| UD parsing contrast set (pp attachment) (Gardner et al., 2020) | UD parsing contrast set (pp attachment) (Gardner et al., 2020)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | 65% (k = 10)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Original                                                       | Sentence: Do [ AGENT : you] [ VERB : prefer] [ PATIENT : ham, bacon or sausages] [ ADVERBIAL : with your breakfast]? PP attachment: Verb ('with your breakfast' attaches to 'prefer')                                                                                                                                      | Sentence: Do [ AGENT : you] [ VERB : prefer] [ PATIENT : ham, bacon or sausages] [ ADVERBIAL : with your breakfast]? PP attachment: Verb ('with your breakfast' attaches to 'prefer')                                                                                                                                      |
| Perturbation strategy: Swap attachment to Noun                 | Perturbation strategy: Swap attachment to Noun                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | Perturbation strategy: Swap attachment to Noun                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| Edits                                                          | PATIENT:CHANGE_CONTENT(ham, bacon or sausages with),CHANGE_SPEC(partial) ADVERBIAL:DELETE ! [ VERB + active + present : prefer &#124; PATIENT + complete ✮ partial : ham, bacon or sausages with &#124; ADVERBIAL + complete : with your breakfast] <id_0> you <id_1> <id_2> <id_3> ?                                      | PATIENT:CHANGE_CONTENT(ham, bacon or sausages with),CHANGE_SPEC(partial) ADVERBIAL:DELETE ! [ VERB + active + present : prefer &#124; PATIENT + complete ✮ partial : ham, bacon or sausages with &#124; ADVERBIAL + complete : with your breakfast] <id_0> you <id_1> <id_2> <id_3> ?                                      |
| Perturbed                                                      | Sentence: Do [ AGENT : you] [ VERB : prefer] [ PATIENT : ham, bacon or sausages with bacon on them]? PP attachment : Noun ('with bacon them' attaches to 'sausages')                                                                                                                                                       | Sentence: Do [ AGENT : you] [ VERB : prefer] [ PATIENT : ham, bacon or sausages with bacon on them]? PP attachment : Noun ('with bacon them' attaches to 'sausages')                                                                                                                                                       |
| Original                                                       | Sentence: [ AGENT : It] [ VERB : has] [ PATIENT : local boutiques and a diverse range of food at all prices and styles]. PP attachment : Noun ('at all prices and styles' attaches to 'food')                                                                                                                              | Sentence: [ AGENT : It] [ VERB : has] [ PATIENT : local boutiques and a diverse range of food at all prices and styles]. PP attachment : Noun ('at all prices and styles' attaches to 'food')                                                                                                                              |
| Perturbation strategy: Swap attachment to Verb                 | Perturbation strategy: Swap attachment to Verb                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | Perturbation strategy: Swap attachment to Verb                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| Edits                                                          | PATIENT:CHANGE_CONTENT(local boutiques and a diverse range of food) LOCATIVE:CHANGE_CONTENT(at),CHANGE_SPEC(partial) ! [ VERB + active + present : have &#124; PATIENT + complete : local boutiques and a diverse range of food at all prices and styles &#124; LOCATIVE + partial : at] <id_0> you <id_1> <id_2> <id_3> ? | PATIENT:CHANGE_CONTENT(local boutiques and a diverse range of food) LOCATIVE:CHANGE_CONTENT(at),CHANGE_SPEC(partial) ! [ VERB + active + present : have &#124; PATIENT + complete : local boutiques and a diverse range of food at all prices and styles &#124; LOCATIVE + partial : at] <id_0> you <id_1> <id_2> <id_3> ? |
| Perturbed                                                      | Sentence: [ AGENT : It] [ VERB : has] [ PATIENT : local boutiques and a diverse range of food] [ LOCATIVE : at every turn]. PP attachment : Verb ('at every turn' attaches to 'has')                                                                                                                                       | Sentence: [ AGENT : It] [ VERB : has] [ PATIENT : local boutiques and a diverse range of food] [ LOCATIVE : at every turn]. PP attachment : Verb ('at every turn' attaches to 'has')                                                                                                                                       |
| QA implication (Ribeiro et al., 2019)                          | QA implication (Ribeiro et al., 2019)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | QA implication (Ribeiro et al., 2019)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | 81% (k = 1)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| Original                                                       | Q: [ MANNER : How] did [ AGENT : the Huguenots] [ VERB : defend] [ PATIENT : themselves]? A: their own militia                                                                                                                                                                                                             | Q: [ MANNER : How] did [ AGENT : the Huguenots] [ VERB : defend] [ PATIENT : themselves]? A: their own militia                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| Perturbation strategy: Swap answer to be agent                 | Perturbation strategy: Swap answer to be agent                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | Perturbation strategy: Swap answer to be agent                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| Edits                                                          | AGENT:CONTENT(who); MANNER:CONTENT(their own militia),SPEC(partial) ! [ VERB + active + past : defend &#124; AGENT + complete : the Huguenots ✮ who &#124; PATIENT + complete : them- selves &#124; MANNER + complete ✮ partial : how ✮ their own militia] <id_0> <id_1> <id_2> <id_3> ?                                   | AGENT:CONTENT(who); MANNER:CONTENT(their own militia),SPEC(partial) ! [ VERB + active + past : defend &#124; AGENT + complete : the Huguenots ✮ who &#124; PATIENT + complete : them- selves &#124; MANNER + complete ✮ partial : how ✮ their own militia] <id_0> <id_1> <id_2> <id_3> ?                                   |
| Perturbed                                                      | Q: [ AGENT : Who] has [ VERB : defended] [ PATIENT : themselves] [ MANNER : by setting up their own militia]? A: the Huguenots                                                                                                                                                                                             | Q: [ AGENT : Who] has [ VERB : defended] [ PATIENT : themselves] [ MANNER : by setting up their own militia]? A: the Huguenots                                                                                                                                                                                             |

## Input

[ VERB + passive + past : lower | AGENT : * | PATIENT + partial : corporate bonds | TEMPORAL + complete : this year] One indication of a growing number of junk defaults , Mr. Asquith says , is that about half of the $ 3 billion of &lt;id\_0&gt; that &lt;id\_1&gt; &lt;id\_2&gt; &lt;id\_3&gt; to a default rating &lt;id\_4&gt; &lt;id\_5&gt; are junk bonds sold during the market 's big issue years of 1984 through 1986 ..

[ VERB + active + present : visit | AGENT : * | PATIENT + partial :

Galilee | TEMPORAL : *] &lt;id\_0&gt; went to &lt;id\_1&gt; &lt;id\_2&gt; &lt;id\_3&gt; .

## Degenerate Output

pastra pastra sanatate sanatate pastraurmatoarele sanatateurmatoarele pastradatorita sanatatedatorita pastracresterea sanatate urmeaza sanatateinformatiile sanatatecresterea pastra urmeaza urmeaza pastrainformatiileinformatiiledatoritadatoritaurmatoarele.

AG pastra pastra sanatate sanatate pastraurmatoarele sanatateurmatoareleurmatoarele pastrainformatiile sanatateinformatiileinformatiile pastradatorita sanatatedatoritadatoritaurmatoareledatoritainformatiile dumneavoastra sanatate urmeaza sanatatecresterea

Table 8: Example inputs from the validation set for which the T ailor generator outputs degenerate text.

For UD English (Nivre et al., 2016), we use constrained decoding (Hokamp and Liu, 2017) to prevent generation of the original prepositional phrase. Our strategy for changing prepositional phrase (PP) attachments from verb ! noun is similar to that of noun ! verb , introduced in §5. We use the following composition of perturbation operations: append the preposition to the patient keyword ( e.g., 'ham or sausages with'), change patient keyword specificity from complete ✮ partial (to generate a new PP attaching to the patient), and delete the argument with original verb attachment ( e.g., ADVERBIAL 'with your breakfast').

We note that T ailor achieves higher validity changing attachment from noun ! verb (82%) than verb ! noun (48%). This result is expected, as all semantic role labeling arguments attach to verb predicates; thus, introducing controls for an SRL argument ( e.g., LOCATIVE with keyword content 'at') to generate a preopositional phrase with verb attachment ('at every turn') reflects the training objective of the generator. On the other hand, our verb ! noun strategy involves appending the preposition to the keyword control for an argument, and none of our controls explicitly reflect the target attachment of a prepositional phrase within an argument ( e.g., keyword controls do not specify whether 'with' should attach to 'sausages' vs 'ham'). Furthermore, preposition keywords within an SRL argument do not deterministically lead to noun attachments in our training data-Sometimes a preposition within an argument may reflect verb attachment ( e.g., in the case of 'Do [ AGENT : you] [ VERB : prefer] [ PATIENT : eating with a fork or eating with a knife]?'; here, 'eating with a fork or eating with a knife' is the patient of 'prefer' but prepositional phrase 'with a fork' attaches to verb 'eating.') Because the training objective of our generator does not provide deterministic signal for noun attachment outputs, we do not expect our verb ! noun strategy to always result in generations with noun attachment. Our verb ! noun strategy is instead intended to facilitate the collection of text with noun attachment. Future work can investigate incorporating auxiliary signals about target configurations of keyword contents in outputs ( e.g., that a preposition should depend on a particular word in the span).

Table 9: Accuracies of predictors on original task evaluation data and contrasts sets. The performance drops on contrast sets (vs. original test accuracies), shown in parentheses, are similar for T ailor -generated contrast sets and expert-created sets (Gardner et al., 2020; Ribeiro et al., 2019).

| Dataset   | Task Eval   | Contrast Set   | Contrast Set   |
|-----------|-------------|----------------|----------------|
|           | Original    | Human #        | Tailor #       |
| BoolQ     | 82.8        | 64.8 (-17.5)   | 64.7 (-17.6)   |
| SQuAD     | 91.8        | 66.1 (-25.7)   | 55.3 (-36.5)   |
| MATRES    | 70.3        | 49.4 (-20.9)   | 42.3 (-28.0)   |

## D.2 Predictor Performance Evaluation

The performances of downstream predictors on original task evaluation data and contrast sets, both T ailor -generated and human-expert-generated, are shown in Table 9. 16 For SQuAD, we evaluate a fine-tuned R o BERT a , the most downloaded model hosted on Huggingface, 17 and use the QA implication challenge set (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) as the human contrast set. Since we could not find readily available predictors for BoolQ and MATRES, we formulate these tasks as a text-to-text task and fine-tune T5base for 10 epochs; we evaluate the checkpoint with the lowest validation loss. 18

16 We report accuracy on the test set for MATRES and heldout validation sets for BoolQ and SQuAD, which do not have publicly available test sets.

[17 https://huggingface.co/deepset/ roberta-base-squad2](https://huggingface.co/deepset/roberta-base-squad2)

Table 10: Examples of augmented data in NLI augmentation experiments (§6). We use original SNLI hypotheses as premises in the augmented data and use SWAP\_CORE with T ailor to generate new hypotheses.

| Premise                                                          | T ailor -Generated Hypothesis                                      |
|------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| A lady in shorts is riding a bike.                               | A bike is riding a lady in shorts.                                 |
| A band plays drums in the parade.                                | Drums are playing a band in the parade.                            |
| A young woman eating doritos on mars.                            | Doritos is eating a young woman on mars                            |
| A crowd of people is outside watching a surfer.                  | A surfer is outside watching a crowd of people.                    |
| A lady is holding a viola in the woods.                          | A viola is holding a lady in the woods.                            |
| A girl in striped swimsuit is jumps into the ocean to catch fish | Fish is jumps into the ocean to catch a girl in striped swimsuit   |
| A person is training a choir for the upcoming competition.       | For the upcoming competition is training a choir has been person   |
| The photographer gathers the bridal party before the ceremony.   | The bridal party is gathering the photographer before the ceremony |

The drops in predictors' accuracies on the T ai -lor -generated contrast sets (compared to original test accuracies) show that they can be used to reveal model errors not reflected in original validation data. However, this result should be interpreted with caution, as it is not directly reflective of dataset quality. For instance, if the contrast data tests one error type or is adversarially constructed to include instances where predictors fail, then lower accuracy does not necessarily mean exposing more model errors. Thus, we treat these performance metrics as secondary to other direct metrics of dataset quality, discussed in §5, and run this analysis on a small number of contrast set instances as a sanity check. That said, the fact that predictors perform poorly on T ailor -generated contrast sets even without including an adversarial component in our contrast set creation suggests that T ailor can be useful for creating evaluation data to find model errors.

## E Data Augmentation Details (§6)

Augmented data. To create our augmented data, we filter generations by perplexity scores from GPT-2 such that we retain 75% of generations. Examples of augmented inputs are shown in Table 10.

Classifiers. We train all SNLI classifiers, which build on R o BERT a -base (Liu et al., 2019), using AllenNLP (Gardner et al., 2018). We train for 10 epochs using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 2e-05 and batch size 32; we use early stopping with a patience of 3.

18 For MATRES, we format inputs by surrounding verbs with marker ' &lt; el &gt; ' and ' &lt;/ el &gt; ' and train the predictor to output the label in natural language, e.g., 'Mr. Erdogan has long &lt; el &gt; sought &lt;/ el &gt; an apology... After that raid An Israeli raid on this ship &lt; el &gt; left &lt;/ el &gt; nine passengers dead...' ! 'before'.

## F T ailor 's fine-grained and compositional perturbations on S tyle PTB

Here, we show how T ailor can be applied to finegrained style transfer. We evaluate T ailor without any finetuning 19 on the S tyle PTB benchmark (Lyu et al., 2021), which builds on the Penn Treebank and assesses fine-grained stylistic changes, both on single transfers ( e.g., To Future Tense ) and compositional ones that concurrently edit multiple stylistic dimensions ( e.g., To Future Tense + Active To Passive ).

Transfers Evaluated. We evaluate on the transfers in S tyle PTB for which Lyu et al. (2021) report results, as their baselines require training separate models for each transfer. Within this subset of transfers, we exclude PP Back to Front and Passive to Active from evaluation, as they contain &lt; 5 test inputs. We also exclude the transfers Substatement Removal , Information Addition , Adjective Emphasis , and Verb / Action Emphasis , for which our semantic-role-derived inputs are not well-suited. For example, Substatement Removal involves removing substatements that represent 'referring' and 'situations,' both of which are technical philosophical concepts that cannot be straightforwardly detected through semantic roles. As another example, Information Addition requires adding unordered keyword contents to a sentence (eg the work force provides the third arm of the alliance ; add keywords: force black ! the work force pro- vides the third arm of the black alliance force . While the T ailor generator was only trained with ordered arguments, one could extend the keyword contents to also include unordered target tokens.

19 This evaluation is zero-shot in spirit, as T ailor is not trained on any paired transfers present in S tyle PTB. However, it is unclear if the test inputs in S tyle PTB overlap with the Ontonotes 5.0 training data, since the two do share some data points (van Son et al., 2018), and S tyle PTB does not seem to preserve original PTB splits. This leakage may advantage the external SRL predictor in parsing S tyle PTB test inputs. Still, this advantage should be minor, as the evaluated transfers do not require complex semantic role parsing.

Table 11: BLEU scores for single and compositional style transfers in S tyle PTB. Baseline results are taken from Tables 14-16 and 19-20 in Lyu et al. (2021). * represents the same type of models finetuned on di erent subsets of styles, e.g., CS-GPT* in (b) includes CS-GPT-TV, trained on all Tense + Voice compositional transfers, and CSGPT-TP, on Tenses + PPRemoval . Asingle T ailor model helps achieve comparable performance on single transfers compared to finetuned baselines, and is more capable on multiple compositional transfers.

|                      | Single Finetune   | Single Finetune   | Compos. Finetune   | Compos. Finetune   | No Finetune   | No Finetune        |
|----------------------|-------------------|-------------------|--------------------|--------------------|---------------|--------------------|
| (a) Single transfers | GPT-2             | R etrieve E dit   | CS-GPT-TV          | CS-GPT-TP          | T ailor       | T ailor , Filtered |
| To Future Tense      | 89.5              | 89.9              | 72.7               | 81.0               | 87.3          | 88.9, 357 / 364    |
| To Past Tense        | 83.6              | 93.5              | 69.4               | 83.4               | 88.4          | 89.3, 216 / 218    |
| To Present Tense     | 75.4              | 90.9              | 73.3               | 82.6               | 71.0          | 84.7, 175 / 209    |
| ADJ or ADV Removal   | 64.7              | 89.7              | -                  | -                  | 78.1          | 84.3, 224 / 243    |
| PP Front to Back     | 39.8              | 54.1              | -                  | -                  | 84.2          | 96.9, 20 / 23      |
| PP Removal           | 76.3              | 79.8              | -                  | 76.0               | 71.7          | 85.7, 199 / 238    |
| Active to Passive    | 47.6              | 68.1              | 47.2               | -                  | 55.6          | 77.8, 98 / 137     |

| transfers         | transfers                   | Compos. Finetune CS-GPT *   | Multi-Single Finetune ys en   | No Finetune              | No Finetune                                                              |
|-------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| (b) Compositional | (b) Compositional           |                             | CS-S -G *                     | T ailor                  | T ailor , Filtered                                                       |
|                   | ToPast + ActiveToPassive    | 40.9 49.6 52.8 47.4         | 33.7 41.9 39.9 36.5           | 66.0 46.8 68.3 70.2 69.9 | 66.0, 30 / 30 67.0, 90 / 131 68.3, 131 / 131 70.2, 65 / 65 69.9, 95 / 95 |
|                   | ToFuture + ActiveToPassive  |                             |                               |                          |                                                                          |
|                   | ToFuture + PassiveToActive  |                             |                               |                          |                                                                          |
|                   | ToPast + PassiveToActive    |                             |                               |                          |                                                                          |
|                   | ToPresent + PassiveToActive | 52.3                        | 42.4                          |                          |                                                                          |
|                   | ToPresent + ActiveToPassive | 50.3                        | 44.5                          | 31.5                     | 61.4, 43 / 84                                                            |
|                   | ToFuture + PPRemoval        | 73.8                        | 46.5                          | 74.3                     | 79.2, 215 / 229                                                          |
|                   | ToPast + PPRemoval          | 77.2                        | 54.2                          | 73.8                     | 79.7, 100 / 108                                                          |
|                   | ToPresent + PPRemoval       | 70.9                        | 54.5                          | 69.1                     | 70.4, 153 / 156                                                          |

Perturbation strategies. For transfers modifying only verb tense ( e.g., To Future Tense ), we mask the verb, modal arguments, and negation arguments, as these are relevant to verb conjugations, and make relevant perturbations on the secondary verb control specifying tense. For transfers modifying verb voice, we mask the verb, agent, and patient. For transfers requiring removal of certain parts of speech (POS)i.e., ADJ or ADV Removal , PP Removal , and all compositional Tense + PP Removal sub-transfers -we first use spacy to detect such POS, next mask all arguments containing them, and finally perturb the keyword contents to remove the POS for these arguments. For PP Front to Back , we mask the argument at the beginning of the original text and implement the change using CHANGE\_IDX .

We use cased keywords (A.2) to encourage generations with similarly ordered arguments as the original sentence, except for the PP Front to Back transfer, which calls for di erently ordered arguments. For transfers modifying verb form only, we set the number of extra blanks to be 2 to allow for generation of helper verbs; for other transfers, we allow for 0 extra blanks to preserve the original order of generated spans. We decode perturbed sentences greedly using beam search (with beam width 10) and preventing repeated bigrams.

For each transfer, we create perturbations for each predicate in the original input, and report mean BLEU scores. 20 Because this process results in multiple perturbations (one per verb), we choose the one with the lowest perplexity from GPT-2 to represent the transfer. Unsuccessful transfers, either due to a failure of perturbation strategy ( e.g., no verbs are found by our SRL predictor) or due to a degenerate output (see §C), are given a BLEU score of 0.0.

Baselines. We work with baselines reported by Lyu et al. (2021): GPT-2 and R etrieve E dit are the best-performing single-transfer models evaluated but require separate models to be trained for each transfer. CS-GPT* are models trained on compositional subsets of data ( e.g., Tense + Voice , detailed in Table 11 caption). CS-S ys -G en are ablations of CS-GPT* trained only on corresponding individual changes but evaluated on compositional transfers. 21

Result. On compositional transfers, we find that T ailor outperforms the baseline system trained without compositional fine-tuning, CS-S ys -G en , on 8 / 9 compositions, and even outperforms CSGPT* (models with compositional finetuning) on 5 cases. It also achieves compatible or better results than GPT-2 and R etrieve E dit on single transfers. Low T ailor performance on some transfers ( e.g., ToFuture + ActiveToPassive ) appears to be driven by unsuccessful transfers, rather than generations that do not follow controls, as indicated by the higher performances on the subset where unsuccessful transfers are removed ( Filtered Test ). Importantly, T ailor achieves these gains with a single model and without any transfer-specific finetuning .

20 We report Bleu\_1 from nlg-eval (Sharma et al., 2017).

21 CS-S ys -G en refers to CS-GPT-Z ero in Lyu et al. (2021).