## Black-Box Tuning for Language-Model-as-a-Service

Tianxiang Sun 1 Yunfan Shao 1 Hong Qian 2 Xuanjing Huang 1 Xipeng Qiu 1 3

## Abstract

Extremely large pre-trained language models (PTMs) such as GPT-3 are usually released as a service. It allows users to design task-specific prompts to query the PTMs through some blackbox APIs. In such a scenario, which we call Language-Model-as-a-Service (LMaaS), the gradients of PTMs are usually unavailable. Can we optimize the task prompts by only accessing the model inference APIs? This paper proposes the black-box tuning framework to optimize the continuous prompt prepended to the input text via derivative-free optimization. Instead of optimizing in the original high-dimensional prompt space, which is intractable for traditional derivative-free optimization, we perform optimization in a randomly generated subspace due to the low intrinsic dimensionality of large PTMs. The experimental results show that the black-box tuning with RoBERTa on a few labeled samples not only significantly outperforms manual prompt and GPT3's in-context learning, but also surpasses the gradient-based counterparts, i.e., prompt tuning and full model tuning.

## 1. Introduction

Scaling pre-trained language models (PTMs) has shown increasing power on a wide range of NLP tasks (Devlin et al., 2019; Raffel et al., 2020; Brown et al., 2020; Fedus et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2020; 2021b; Zeng et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2021; Qiu et al., 2020). Extremely large PTMs can easily generalize to various downstream tasks with a few labeled samples (Brown et al., 2020). However, making these large PTMs benefit everyone is a challenge. On the one hand, running such models can be very expensive or even infeasible for most users. On the other hand, the model parameters are often not open-sourced due to commercial

1 Fudan University 2 East China Normal University 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory. Correspondence to: Tianxiang Sun &lt; txsun19@fudan.edu.cn &gt; , Xipeng Qiu &lt; xpqiu@fudan.edu.cn &gt; .

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine Learning , Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

<!-- image -->

Figure 1. Illustration of Language-Model-as-a-Service (LMaaS). Users can query the PTM deployed on the server through a blackbox API. In each query, users can input a task prompt and a batch of texts. On the server side, the samples can be mixed in a large batch to be fed into the PTM. By iteratively querying the PTM through the black-box API, users can optimize and finally obtain good prompts to solve the language tasks of interest.

considerations and the potential risk of misuse. 1 Therefore, large PTMs such as GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), ERNIE 3.0 (Sun et al., 2021) and Yuan 1.0 (Wu et al., 2021) are usually released as a service, allowing users to access these powerful models through black-box APIs.

In this scenario, called Language-Model-as-a-Service (LMaaS), users can solve the language tasks of interest using the black-box APIs by crafting task-specific text prompts or including training samples in the input texts (a.k.a. incontext learning (Brown et al., 2020)). Due to the great power of the general-purpose PTMs underlying the APIs, such approaches can achieve considerable performance on simple language tasks, and therefore have powered many interesting applications 2 . However, querying large PTMs through hand-crafted text prompts cannot fully exploit labeled data, resulting in unsatisfactory performance in many use cases.

Instead of designing discrete text prompts, recently much effort has been devoted to continuous prompt tuning (Li &amp; Liang, 2021; Hambardzumyan et al., 2021; Liu et al.,

[1 https://openai.com/blog/openai-api/](https://openai.com/blog/openai-api/)

[2 See https://gpt3demo.com/ for examples.](https://gpt3demo.com/)

2021b), which is to optimize the continuous prompt injected to the text while keeping the PTM parameters frozen. Such methods only require storing a small continuous prompt for each task, and therefore are highly deployment-efficient. Besides, tuning the continuous prompt can be as effective as fine-tuning the entire model when the PTM becomes large (Lester et al., 2021). However, in all the previous methods, the continuous prompts are learned through backpropagation, which is unavailable in the scenario of LMaaS.

Can we optimize the task-specific continuous prompts when we only have access to the PTM inference API? Since gradients are unavailable, we can only invoke derivative-free optimization (DFO) 3 (Kolda et al., 2003; Conn et al., 2009; Rios &amp; Sahinidis, 2013). DFO involves a kind of optimization algorithms that do not depend on gradients, but only relies on function values (or fitness values) of sampled solutions. However, DFO algorithms are known to suffer from slow convergence rate when the dimensionality of the search space is high. Thus, it is intractable to optimize even only the continuous prompts, which can be tens of thousands of parameters, using DFO algorithms.

Fortunately, recent work found that common PTMs, despite their large numbers of parameters, have a very low intrinsic dimensionality (Aghajanyan et al., 2021; Qin et al., 2021). That means, there exists a low-dimensional reparameterization that is as effective for fine-tuning as the full parameter space. It has been demonstrated that optimizing only hundreds (Aghajanyan et al., 2021) or even dozens (Qin et al., 2021) of parameters can achieve non-trivial performance. Given that the intrinsic dimensionality of the objective function (in our case is the forward computation of PTMs) is low, the optimization can be effectively solved via DFO algorithms with random embedding (Wang et al., 2016; Qian et al., 2016; Letham et al., 2020).

Based on the these insights, this paper proposes the BlackBox Tuning (BBT) to solve various language understanding tasks by only accessing the PTM inference API. In particular, we manage to optimize the continuous prompt prepended to the input text by iteratively querying the PTM inference API, as briefly depicted in Figure 1. To handle the high dimensionality of the continuous prompt, we project the original prompt space using a random linear projection onto a much smaller subspace and solve this optimization problem with some derivative-free optimizer in that smaller subsapce. In contrast to conventional finetuning methods that can only be performed by the service side, black-box tuning allows users to optimize their taskspecific prompts locally on resource-limited devices (even without GPUs). Our experimental results demonstrate that prompting RoBERTaLARGE (Liu et al., 2019) using BBT on a few labeled samples not only outperforms manual prompt and in-context learning (Brown et al., 2020), but also outperforms its gradient-based counterparts, namely prompt tuning (Lester et al., 2021) and full model tuning.

3 Also termed as black-box, zeroth-order or gradient-free optimization.

The contribution of this paper is three folds: 4

- This paper proposes a novel scenario (LMaaS) where one should learn to prompt the PTMs by only accessing their inference APIs.
- This paper offers a solution (BBT) for such a scenario to accomplish common language understanding tasks without access to model parameters and gradients, such that large-scale PTMs can better benefit users.
- Empirical results show that DFO can successfully deal with real-world language tasks by learning to prompt large-scale PTMs with more than millions of parameters. Thus, this work pioneers the work of optimizing large-scale PTMs through DFO methods.

## 2. Background

Large-Scale PTMs as APIs. It is a promising way to deploy large-scale PTMs to serve downstream applications by providing general-purpose APIs. For the service side , wrapping the computation of the PTM into an easy-to-use API has become a common practice (Brown et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021). In contrast to training, the inference speed of large-scale PTMs can be highly optimized with acceleration techniques such as ORT and TensorRT. In addition, large-scale PTMs are often not open-sourced due to the commercial reasons and the potential risk of misuse. For the user side , even if the large-scale PTMs are available, it is expensive or even infeasible to locally run them. Thus, how to exploit the PTM inference API to solve conventional language tasks is a promising direction.

Intrinsic Dimensionality of PTMs. The intrinsic dimensionality of an objective function is the minimum number of parameters needed to obtain satisfactory solutions (Li et al., 2018). In particular, the intrinsic dimensionality indicates the lowest dimensional reparameterization that is as effective for optimizing as the full parameter space. Li et al. (2018) propose to measure the intrinsic dimensionality of neural networks by finding the minimal dimensionality of the subspace that is randomly projected from the full trainable parameters, in which they can optimize the neural networks to achieve satisfactory solutions. Aghajanyan et al. (2021) empirically show that large-scale pre-training implicitly compresses the intrinsic dimensionality of downstream NLP tasks. By tuning only hundreds of parameters that are then randomly projected onto the full parameter space of RoBERTa, they can achieve 90% performance relative to full model tuning. Qin et al. (2021) show that intrinsic subspace on various tasks can be compressed to less than 100 dimensions with multi-task supervision. This line of research, along with the work of parameter-efficient tuning (Houlsby et al., 2019; Li &amp; Liang, 2021; Lester et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2021a; He et al., 2021), demonstrate that PTMs can well adapt to downstream tasks by tuning a very small proportion of parameters, which implies the possibility of optimizing large-scale PTMs with derivative-free algorithms.

[4 Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/ txsun1997/Black-Box-Tuning](https://github.com/txsun1997/Black-Box-Tuning)

Prompt-Based Learning. Prompt-based learning is to formulate downstream tasks as a (masked) language modeling task, and therefore reduces the gap between PTM pre-training and fine-tuning (Brown et al., 2020; Schick &amp; Sch¨ utze, 2021a;b; Gao et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2022). For instance, one can use BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) to predict whether the sentence ' This is a fantastic movie ' is positive or negative by appending the prompt ' It was [MASK] ' and see if BERT predicts ' great ' or ' terrible ' at the masked position. Note that the prompt is not necessarily discrete, it can also be optimized efficiently in continuous space with gradient descent (Li &amp; Liang, 2021; Hambardzumyan et al., 2021; Qin &amp; Eisner, 2021; Liu et al., 2021b; Zhong et al., 2021). In the case of only tuning the continuous prompt while keeping the parameters of large PTMs untouched, one can retain the efficient serving benefits while matching the performance of full model tuning (Lester et al., 2021). Our work also proposes to optimize the continuous prompt while keeping the PTM parameters unchanged, but without gradient descent.

Derivative-Free Optimization. Derivative-free optimization (DFO) realizes optimization only via the function values f ( x ) on the sampled solutions x . Most DFO algorithms share a common structure of sampling-and-updating to enhance the quality of solutions. Representative DFO algorithms include evolutionary algorithms (Hansen et al., 2003), Bayesian optimization (Shahriari et al., 2016), etc. Due to their ability of addressing complex optimization tasks, DFO algorithms have achieved many impressive applications in automatic machine learning (Snoek et al., 2012), reinforcement learning (Salimans et al., 2017; Hu et al., 2017), objective detection (Zhang et al., 2015b), etc.

## 3. Approach

## 3.1. Problem Formulation

Common language understanding tasks can be formulated as a classification task, which is to predict for a batch of input texts X the labels Y . To solve the target language understanding task with a general-purpose PTM, we should modify X with some template (e.g., adding some trigger words and a special token [MASK] for BERT-like PTMs) and map the labels Y to some words in the PTM vocabulary (e.g., the sentiment label 'positive' can be mapped to 'great'). The modified inputs and labels are denoted as ˜ X and ˜ Y . Assume the BERT-like PTM inference API f takes a continuous prompt p and a batch of modified texts ˜ X as input, and outputs the logits on the masked positions, i.e., ˆ Y = f ( p ; ˜ X ) . With the output logits, we can calculate the loss on this batch of data, which is not necessarily to be differentiable. Our goal is to find the optimal prompt p glyph[star] = arg min p ∈P L ( f ( p ; ˜ X ) , ˜ Y ) , where P is some search space of interest and L is some loss function such as negative accuracy. The black-box function f is not available to the optimizer in closed form, but can be evaluated at a query point ( p ; ˜ X ) .

## 3.2. Black-Box Tuning

As demonstrated by Lester et al. (2021), dozens of prompt tokens are required to obtain a competitive performance when only tuning continuous prompts. Given that the embedding dimensionality of large-scale PTMs is usually larger than one thousand (e.g., the word embeddings of RoBERTaLARGE are 1024-dimensional), the dimensionality of the continuous prompt p ∈ R D that we are interested to optimize can be tens of thousands, which makes derivative-free optimization intractable. To handle this high-dimensional optimization, since large-scale PTMs have a low intrinsic dimensionality (Aghajanyan et al., 2021; Qin et al., 2021), we manage to optimize z ∈ R d in a much smaller subspace ( d glyph[lessmuch] D ), and use a random projection matrix A ∈ R D × d to project z on the original prompt space P .

Note that directly projecting z onto the prompt space that is compatible with the PTM is non-trivial. To ease the optimization, we instead optimize the increment of some initial prompt p 0 . For simplicity, we randomly sample n tokens from the PTM vocabulary as initialization. Thus, our objective becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Z is the search space. Previous work (Wang et al., 2016; Qian et al., 2016; Letham et al., 2020) in derivativefree optimization usually sets each entry in the random matrix A by sampling from some normal distribution. However, this sampling strategy does not perform well in our scenario. Instead, we set values of the random matrix A by sampling from a uniform distribution adopted in He et al. (2015) (cf. Appendix A for the comparison). We restrict the search space to Z = [ -5 , 5] d .

For the loss function L , a straightforward alternative is using negative accuracy. However, the reward of accuracy can be sparse and less informative, especially when training data is limited. Thus, we also consider two loss functions that are more sensitive to predictions, i.e., cross entropy and hinge loss. Given the output logits ˆ y over a candidate set of label words, and the golden label word ˜ y of a certain sample, the cross entropy is defined as

Figure 2. A single iteration of the optimization. Given z ∈ R d provided by the derivative-free optimizer, we project it to the prompt space by a random matrix A ∈ R D × d . By adding the projected prompt embeddings Az with some initial prompt embeddings p 0 (in this illustration are the embeddings of tokens randomly sampled from the PTM's vocabulary), we obtain the final prompt embeddings that are then concatenated with the input texts ˜ X . By calling the black-box API f , which implements the forward computation of the PTM, the predictions on the masked positions are obtained, i.e., ˆ Y = f ( p ; ˜ X ) . With the prediction ˆ Y and the golden labels ˜ Y at hand, we can calculate the loss that is used by the derivative-free optimizer to suggest a new z .

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For hinge loss, we adopt a multi-class extension (Weston &amp; Watkins, 1999),

glyph[negationslash]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In this work we set the margin γ = 2 . The performances of using cross entropy, hinge loss, and negative accuracy are compared in Figure 3.

## 3.3. The CMA Evolution Strategy

As demonstrated in Aghajanyan et al. (2021), the intrinsic dimensionality of PTMs like RoBERTaLARGE on various tasks can be hundreds. To handle optimization of such scale, we adopt the CMA-ES (Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy) (Hansen &amp; Ostermeier, 2001; Hansen et al., 2003), which is a widely used evolutionary algorithm for non-convex black-box optimization in continuous domain.

In particular, CMA-ES maintains a parameterized search distribution model, i.e., multivariate normal distribution. In each iteration, CMA-ES samples a population of new query solutions (also referred to as individuals or offspring) from the multivariate normal distribution model

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where i = 1 , . . . , λ and λ is the population size. m ( t ) ∈ R d is the mean vector of the search distribution at iteration step t , σ ( t ) ∈ R + is the overall standard deviation that controls the step length, and C ( t ) ∈ R d × d is the covariance matrix that determines the shape of the distribution ellipsoid. By maximizing the likelihood of successful steps, m ( t ) , σ ( t ) , C ( t ) are updated (cf. Hansen (2016) for more details).

## 3.4. Pre-Training Prompt Embedding

Considering that sentence-pair tasks can share the same template and label words, as shown in Table 1, we can pretrain a prompt embedding p 0 on some publicly available NLI task (in our experiments we use the MNLI (Williams et al., 2018) training set) for a better initialization. For other classification tasks we set p 0 as word embeddings randomly drawn from the vocabulary of RoBERTaLARGE.

## 4. Experiments

## 4.1. Setup

Dataset. We conduct experiments on several common language understanding tasks including sentiment analysis, topic classification, natural language inference (NLI), and paraphrase. For sentiment analysis, we choose SST2 (Socher et al., 2013) and Yelp polarity (Zhang et al., 2015a). For topic classification, we choose AG's News and DBPedia (Zhang et al., 2015a). For NLI, we choose SNLI (Bowman et al., 2015) and RTE (Wang et al., 2019). For paraphrase, we choose MRPC (Dolan &amp; Brockett, 2005). The statistics, manual templates and label words of these datasets are shown in Table 1.

Table 1. Statistics, manual templates, and label words used in our experiments. | Y | : number of classes.

| Category         | Dataset            | &#124; Y &#124;   | &#124; Train &#124;   | &#124; Test &#124;   | Type                      | Template                                                           | Label words                                                                                                                          |
|------------------|--------------------|-------------------|-----------------------|----------------------|---------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| single- sentence | SST-2 Yelp P. AG's | 2 2 4             | 67k 560k 120k         | 0.9k 38k 7.6k        | sentiment sentiment topic | 〈 S 〉 . It was [MASK] . 〈 S 〉 . It was [MASK] . [MASK] News: 〈 S 〉 | great, bad great, bad World, Sports, Business, Tech Company, Education, Artist, Athlete, Transportation, Building, Natural, Village, |
| single- sentence | News               |                   |                       |                      |                           |                                                                    |                                                                                                                                      |
| single- sentence | DBPedia            | 14                | 560k                  | 70k                  | topic                     | [Category: [MASK] ] 〈 S                                            | Office, Animal, Plant, Album, Film, Written                                                                                          |
| sentence- pair   | MRPC               | 2                 | 3.7k                  | 0.4k                 | paraphrase                | 〈 S 1 〉 ? [MASK] , 〈 S 2 〉 S 1 〉 ? [MASK] , 〈 S 2 〉                | Yes, No Yes, No                                                                                                                      |
| sentence- pair   | RTE                | 2                 | 2.5k                  | 0.3k                 | NLI                       | 〈                                                                  |                                                                                                                                      |
| sentence- pair   | SNLI               | 3                 | 549k                  | 9.8k                 | NLI                       | 〈 S 1 〉 ? [MASK] , 〈 S 2 〉                                         | Yes, Maybe, No                                                                                                                       |

Few-Shot Setting. For a broad range of users, the amount of labeled data can be limited, in which case they can resort to the deployed large PTMs due to their great power of fewshot learning (Brown et al., 2020). Hence, in this paper we conduct experiments in the few-shot setting. We randomly select k samples for each class to construct a k -shot training set D train, and compose a development set D dev by randomly drawing another k samples from the original training set and ensure that |D train | = |D dev | to simulate the true few-shot learning setting (Perez et al., 2021). Following Zhang et al. (2021a), Gao et al. (2021), and Gu et al. (2021), we use the original development sets as the test sets. For datasets without development sets, we use the original test sets. Hence, in our experiments |D test | glyph[greatermuch] |D train | = |D dev | .

Backbone Model. We choose RoBERTaLARGE (Liu et al., 2019) as our backbone model because: (1) We mainly focus on language understanding tasks; (2) Aghajanyan et al. (2021) have demonstrated that RoBERTaLARGE has a very small intrinsic dimensionality (about hundreds) on many tasks. It is worth noting that generative PTMs such as GPT (Brown et al., 2020), T5 (Raffel et al., 2020) and BART (Lewis et al., 2020) are also compatible with our framework if we convert downstream tasks into a unified text-to-text format. We leave for future work the applications of generative PTMs.

Baselines. We compare our proposed black-box tuning with two kinds of methods: gradient-based methods and gradient-free methods. For gradient-based methods , we consider three baselines: (1) Prompt Tuning : Following Lester et al. (2021), we only train the continuous prompts prepended to the input texts while keeping the PTM frozen. We use an Adam optimizer (Kingma &amp; Ba, 2015) with learning rate of 5e-4 and batch size of 16 for 1000 epochs. For fair comparison, we use the same prompt length, manual template, label words, and the same pre-trained prompt embedding for initialization on sentence-pair tasks as black-box tuning. (2) P-Tuning v2 (Liu et al., 2021a) is an improved variant of prompt tuning. Instead of injecting continuous prompts merely into the input layer, P-Tuning v2 prepends and optimizes continuous prompts at every layer of the PTM. We optimize the prompts of length 128 at each layer using an Adam optimizer with learning rate of 5e-4 and batch size of 32 for 2000 epochs. (3) Model Tuning : We fine-tune the entire PTM on each task using an Adam optimizer with learning rate of 1e-5 and batch size of 16 for 200 epochs. For gradient-free methods , we consider three baselines: (1) Manual Prompt : We directly use the templates and label words in Table 1 to conduct zero-shot evaluation. The results of manual prompt can be seen as initial points of our method. (2) In-context Learning : Following Brown et al. (2020), we randomly select up to 32 training samples and concatenate them with the input texts. (3) Feature-based Methods : Feature-based methods (Peters et al., 2019) is also a competitive baseline for LMaaS, where one can request the features encoded by the large PTM and locally train a classifier to accomplish the task of interest. Here we consider two implementations: (a) Feature-MLP : We train a two-layered MLP classifier on the [CLS] representation of the PTM. (b) Feature-BiLSTM : We train a bidirectional LSTM (Hochreiter &amp; Schmidhuber, 1997) on the representations of the sequence of tokens, followed by a linear classifier on the top. For both implementations of feature- based methods, we use an Adam optimizer with learning rate of 3e-4 and batch size of 16 to train the attached classifiers for 1000 epochs. For black-box tuning, we give in Table 2 the default configuration of hyper-parameters used in our experiments. The effect of each hyper-parameter is explored in § 4.3.

Table 2. Default configuration of hyper-parameters.

| Hyper-parameter                  | Default       |
|----------------------------------|---------------|
| Prompt length ( L )              | 50            |
| Subspace dimension ( d )         | 500           |
| Population size ( λ )            | 20            |
| Random projection ( A )          | Uniform       |
| Loss function L Budget (# of API | Cross Entropy |
| calls)                           | 8000          |

## 4.2. Results

Overall Comparison. We first demonstrate the experimental results of black-box tuning and the baselines across 7 datasets in Table 3. The proposed black-box tuning significantly outperforms the other four gradient-free methods. We observe that in-context learning performs even worse than manual prompt on some tasks, and suffers from high variance. That means, in-context learning cannot effectively utilize labeled samples included in the context. Featurebased methods perform slightly better than manual prompt and in-context learning. Meanwhile, Feature-BiLSTM outperforms Feature-MLP due to its advantage of using more informative features. Surprisingly, black-box tuning also outperforms its gradient-based counterparts, namely prompt tuning, p-tuning v2, and model tuning, on average performance of the 7 tasks. Note that the only difference between prompt tuning and black-box tuning is whether we use gradient descent (i.e., Adam optimizer) or DFO algorithm (i.e., CMA-ES). Based on the experimental results, we suspect that gradient-based optimization tends to overfit the small training data while DFO tends to find better solutions due to its exploration mechanism. In addition, we find that model tuning performs much better than prompt tuning and blackbox tuning when number of classes is large (e.g., DBPedia). On NLI tasks (i.e., SNLI and RTE), when using pre-trained prompt embedding (§ 3.4), prompt tuning and black-box tuning significantly outperform model tuning, which also confirms the effectiveness of prompt pre-training (Gu et al., 2021) in the context of black-box tuning.

Detailed Comparison. In the scenario of LMaaS, there are many other factors to be considered. In Table 4 we compare black-box tuning and the baseline methods in terms of deployment efficiency, viability of as-a-service, training time, memory usage on the user side and the server side, and the amount of data to be uploaded and downloaded. Model tuning is not deployment-efficient because it needs to maintain a copy of the entire model for each user. Gradient-based methods cannot make the PTM serve as a service due to the requirement of gradients. Feature-based methods and black-box tuning are suitable for LMaaS. However, featurebased methods cannot achieve competitive results when labeled data is limited. Therefore, among all the considered methods, only black-box tuning can achieve satisfactory performance while maintaining reasonable training time, memory footprint, and network load. Unlike gradient-based methods, in which the optimization cost is proportional to the size of the PTM, the optimization cost of black-box tuning is decoupled from the scale of the PTM, and only relies on the subspace dimensionality. For fair comparison of training time, we perform early stopping for all the compared methods, i.e., we stop learning if the development accuracy does not increase after 1000 steps. All the methods are implemented with PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) and experimented on a single NVIDIA GTX 3090 GPU. Note that the process of model inference can be further accelerated via better implementations (e.g., using ONNX and TensorRT). In Table 4 we also report the training time of black-box tuning using ONNX Runtime. Detailed calculation of the amount of data to be uploaded/downloaded can be found in Appendix C.

## 4.3. Ablation Study

In this section, we conduct ablation experiments on various hyper-parameters. To control experimental variables, we explore the effect of each hyper-parameter while keeping the other hyper-parameters as default as listed in Table 2. To stablize the experimental results and reduce the variance over different runs, we conduct ablation experiments in 64shot setting. Each run is performed on the same data split with different random seeds. Experimental results of ablations on loss functions L , subspace dimensionality d , and prompt length L are demonstrated in Figure 3. Additional ablation studies on the effect of the random projection A , the effect of the population size λ , and the ablations in the 16-shot setting are in Appendix A.

For each ablation, we show results under different budget, which is measured by the number of PTM inference API calls. In each API call, one can provide a continuous prompt p and query the results of the PTM forward computation on a batch of training data. In our few-shot setting, we can put all the training data into one batch, and therefore the objective function to be optimized is deterministic instead of stochastic.

CMA-ES vs. Adam. We compare our used derivativefree optimizer, CMA-ES, with a competitive first-order optimizer, Adam (Kingma &amp; Ba, 2015). For fair comparison, we update the continuous prompt using Adam with the gradients over the entire training data (i.e., batch size equals to |D train | ). We use learning rate of 1e-3 for Adam optimizer. As shown in the top row of Figure 3, Adam optimizer achieves faster convergence on both SST-2 and AG's News due to the gradients it used. On the development sets, Adam performs slight worse than CMA-ES with cross entropy on SST-2 but better on AG's News. But as demonstrated in Table 3, using Adam optimizer performs worse than CMA-ES on the average performance across seven task test sets.

Table 3. Overall comparison on various language understanding tasks. We report mean and standard deviation of performance over 3 different splits (§ 4.1). All of the results are obtained with pre-trained RoBERTaLARGE in 16-shot (per class) setting.

| Method                      | SST-2 acc              | Yelp P. acc            | AG's News acc          | DBPedia acc            | MRPC F1                   | SNLI acc               | RTE acc                | Avg.                   |
|-----------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|---------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Gradient-Based Methods      | Gradient-Based Methods | Gradient-Based Methods | Gradient-Based Methods | Gradient-Based Methods | Gradient-Based Methods    | Gradient-Based Methods | Gradient-Based Methods | Gradient-Based Methods |
| Prompt Tuning + Pre-trained | 68.23 ± 3.78           | 61.02 ± 6.65           | 84.81 ± 0.66           | 87.75 ± 1.48           | 51.61 ± 8.67 77.48 ± 4.85 | 36.13 ± 1.51           | 54.69 ± 3.79           | 63.46                  |
| prompt                      | /                      | /                      | /                      | /                      |                           | 64.55 ± 2.43           | 77.13 ± 0.83           | 74.42                  |
| P-Tuning v2                 | 64.33 ± 3.05           | 92.63 ± 1.39           | 83.46 ± 1.01           | 97.05 ± 0.41           | 68.14 ± 3.89              | 36.89 ± 0.79           | 50.78 ± 2.28           | 70.47                  |
| Model Tuning                | 85.39 ± 2.84           | 91.82 ± 0.79           | 86.36 ± 1.85           | 97.98 ± 0.14           | 77.35 ± 5.70              | 54.64 ± 5.29           | 58.60 ± 6.21           | 78.88                  |
| Gradient-Free Methods       | Gradient-Free Methods  | Gradient-Free Methods  | Gradient-Free Methods  | Gradient-Free Methods  | Gradient-Free Methods     | Gradient-Free Methods  | Gradient-Free Methods  | Gradient-Free Methods  |
| Manual Prompt               | 79.82                  | 89.65                  | 76.96                  | 41.33                  | 67.40                     | 31.11                  | 51.62                  | 62.56                  |
| In-Context Learning         | 79.79 ± 3.06           | 85.38 ± 3.92           | 62.21 ± 13.46          | 34.83 ± 7.59           | 45.81 ± 6.67              | 47.11 ± 0.63           | 60.36 ± 1.56           | 59.36                  |
| Feature-MLP                 | 64.80 ± 1.78           | 79.20 ± 2.26           | 70.77 ± 0.67           | 87.78 ± 0.61           | 68.40 ± 0.86              | 42.01 ± 0.33           | 53.43 ± 1.57           | 66.63                  |
| Feature-BiLSTM              | 65.95 ± 0.99           | 74.68 ± 0.10           | 77.28 ± 2.83           | 90.37 ± 3.10           | 71.55 ± 7.10              | 46.02 ± 0.38           | 52.17 ± 0.25           | 68.29                  |
| Black-Box Tuning            | 89.56 ± 0.25           | 91.50 ± 0.16           | 81.51 ± 0.79           | 87.80 ± 1.53           | 61.56 ± 4.34              | 46.58 ± 1.33           | 52.59 ± 2.21           | 73.01                  |
| + Pre-trained prompt        | /                      | /                      | /                      | /                      | 75.51 ± 5.54              | 83.83 ± 0.21           | 77.62 ± 1.30           | 83.90                  |

Table 4. Comparison of deployment efficiency, viability of as-a-service, test accuracy, training time, memory footprint, and the amount of data to be uploaded/downloaded. glyph[star] indicates the training time of the implementation with ONNX Runtime. All the compared methods are performed on the same 16-shot splits of SST-2 and AG's News.

|                                      | Deployment- Efficient                | As-A- Service                        | Test Accuracy                        | Training Time                        | Memory Footprint                     | Memory Footprint                     | Upload per query                     | Download per query                   |
|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
|                                      |                                      |                                      |                                      |                                      |                                      | Server                               |                                      |                                      |
|                                      |                                      |                                      |                                      |                                      | User                                 |                                      |                                      |                                      |
|                                      | SST-2 (max sequence length:          | SST-2 (max sequence length:          | SST-2 (max sequence length:          | SST-2 (max sequence length:          | SST-2 (max sequence length:          | SST-2 (max sequence length:          | SST-2 (max sequence length:          | SST-2 (max sequence length:          |
| Prompt Tuning                        | √                                    | ×                                    | 72.6                                 | 15.9 mins                            | -                                    | 5.3 GB                               | -                                    | -                                    |
| Model Tuning                         | × √                                  | × √                                  | 87.8                                 | 9.8 mins                             | -                                    | 7.3 GB                               | -                                    | -                                    |
| Feature-MLP                          | √                                    | √                                    | 63.8                                 | 7.0 mins                             | 20MB                                 | 2.8 GB                               | 4 KB                                 | 128 KB                               |
| Feature-BiLSTM                       | √                                    | √                                    | 66.2                                 | 9.3 mins                             | 410MB                                | 2.8 GB                               | 4 KB                                 | 6016 KB                              |
| Black-Box Tuning                     |                                      |                                      | 89.4                                 | 10.1 (6.1 glyph[star] ) mins         | 30MB                                 | 3.0 GB                               | 6 KB                                 | 0.25 KB                              |
| AG's News (max sequence length: 107) | AG's News (max sequence length: 107) | AG's News (max sequence length: 107) | AG's News (max sequence length: 107) | AG's News (max sequence length: 107) | AG's News (max sequence length: 107) | AG's News (max sequence length: 107) | AG's News (max sequence length: 107) | AG's News (max sequence length: 107) |
| Prompt Tuning                        | √                                    | ×                                    | 84.0                                 | 30.2 mins                            | -                                    | 7.7 GB                               | -                                    | -                                    |
| Model Tuning                         | × √                                  | × √                                  | 88.4                                 | 13.1 mins                            | -                                    | 7.3 GB                               | -                                    | -                                    |
| Feature-MLP                          | √                                    | √                                    | 71.0                                 | 13.5 mins                            | 20MB                                 | 3.6 GB                               | 20 KB                                | 256 KB                               |
| Feature-BiLSTM                       | √                                    | √                                    | 73.1                                 | 19.7 mins                            | 500MB                                | 3.6 GB                               | 20 KB                                | 27392 KB                             |
| Black-Box Tuning                     |                                      |                                      | 82.6                                 | 21.0 (17.7 glyph[star] ) mins        | 30MB                                 | 4.6 GB                               | 22 KB                                | 1 KB                                 |

Loss Functions. We consider three loss functions: cross entropy, hinge loss, and negative accuracy. As depicted in the top row of Figure 3, cross entropy and hinge loss significantly outperform the negative accuracy. In the few-shot setting, the accuracy as a reward can be sparse, and cannot provide informative directions for optimization. On SST2 and AG's News, we obtain that cross entropy performs slightly better than hinge loss.

Subspace Dimensionality. The subspace of dimensionality d is the space where the optimization actually performs. According to the intrinsic dimensionality found in Aghajanyan et al. (2021), we explore the subspace dimensionality of { 100, 200, 500, 1000 } within the budget of { 2k, 4k, 6k, 8k } . Accordingly, we set population size λ = 4 + 3 log( d ) . As shown in the middle row of Figure 3, the best subspace dimensionality can be different on different tasks ( d = 200

performs the best on SST-2 development set and d = 500 performs the best on AG's News development set), which is related to the observation that intrinsic dimensionality varies across different tasks (Aghajanyan et al., 2021). In general, a small subspace (e.g., d = 100 ) is hard to cover a good solution, while a large subspace (e.g., d = 1000 ) may lead to poor generalization.

Prompt Length. Prompt length L determines the dimensionality of the original parameter space (in our case D = L × 1024 ). We evaluate black-box tuning under each budget in { 2k, 4k, 6k, 8k } while varying the prompt length in { 10, 20, 50, 100 } . As shown in the bottom row of Figure 3, shorter prompt confers faster convergence on the training sets but does not yield better generalization on the development sets. L = 50 achieves the best accuracy on both SST-2 and AG's News development sets.

Figure 3. Ablations of loss function, subspace dimensionality, and prompt length. We show mean and standard deviation of performance over 3 runs with different random seeds. Ablations of the random projection and the population size can be found in Appendix A.

<!-- image -->

## 5. Discussion and Future Work

In this section we discuss our proposed method in the context of (1) derivative-free optimization and (2) prompt-based learning, respectively. By drawing comparisons with these two lines of research, we highlight some directions that could improve this work in future.

## Comparison with Previous Derivative-Free Approaches.

Our proposed method lies in the same framework of previous work that solves high-dimensional derivative-free optimization problems via random embedding (Wang et al., 2016). In contrast, we set the random embedding A by sampling from a uniform distribution instead of normal distributions, and use the CMA-ES to perform optimization in the generated subspace. In previous work, the target blackbox functions are usually synthetic functions where only a few dimensions can affect the function values, and therefore most of the dimensions are strictly non-effective. In our realworld scenario, the intrinsic dimension can be approximate. In the context of PTMs, a more appropriate substitution for the term intrinsic dimensionality can be glyph[epsilon1] -effective dimensionality (Qian et al., 2016). Considering the relaxation to the intrinsic dimensionality of PTMs, more suitable ap- proaches such as sequential random embedding (Qian et al., 2016) and other more advanced methods of constructing the random projection matrix (Letham et al., 2020) should be explored in future work. Besides, the subspace generated by random projection can be sub-optimal. As demonstrated in Qin et al. (2021), training the projection A with multitask supervision can result in better and smaller subspace. Besides, larger PTMs generally have lower intrinsic dimensionalities (Aghajanyan et al., 2021), as a result, we can use smaller subspace and more efficient DFO algorithms such as Bayesian optimization on larger PTMs.

Comparison with Previous Prompt-Based Learning Approaches. From the perspective of prompt-based learning, our method is similar to prompt-tuning (Lester et al., 2021), where only the continuous prompt prepended to the input text is tuned, so our method also retains the benefits of efficient serving and mixed-task inference. In addition to the continuous prompt, we also insert some hard prompt tokens (e.g., ' It was [MASK] ') in the input text, which has been demonstrated to be effective in previous work (Gu et al., 2021) in the name of hybrid prompt tuning. Different from previous prompt-based learning approaches, our prompt tun- ing does not require backpropagation and gradient descent. Considering our used templates and label words are handcrafted without trial-and-error, the performance reported in this paper is just a lower bound. More advanced techniques such as prompt engineering (Gao et al., 2021), label words engineering (Schick et al., 2020; Shin et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2021b), prompt pre-training (Gu et al., 2021), and prompt ensembling (Lester et al., 2021) are orthogonal to this work and therefore can further improve the performance. For simplicity, we do not integrate these methods and leave for future work.

## Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Yang Yu for the valuable suggestions of the methods and presentation of the paper, and the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments. This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2020AAA0108702), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62022027), the major key project of PCL (No. PCL2021A12), and the Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai (No. 21ZR1420300).

## References

Aghajanyan, A., Gupta, S., and Zettlemoyer, L. Intrinsic dimensionality explains the effectiveness of language model fine-tuning. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, ACL/IJCNLP 2021, (Volume 1: Long Papers), Virtual Event, August 1-6, 2021 , pp. 7319-7328, 2021.

Bowman, S. R., Angeli, G., Potts, C., and Manning, C. D. A large annotated corpus for learning natural language inference. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2015, Lisbon, Portugal, September 17-21, 2015 , pp. 632642, 2015.

Brown, T. B., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J., Dhariwal, P., Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G., Askell, A., Agarwal, S., Herbert-Voss, A., Krueger, G., Henighan, T., Child, R., Ramesh, A., Ziegler, D. M., Wu, J., Winter, C., Hesse, C., Chen, M., Sigler, E., Litwin, M., Gray, S., Chess, B., Clark, J., Berner, C., McCandlish, S., Radford, A., Sutskever, I., and Amodei, D. Language models are few-shot learners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual , 2020.

Conn, A. R., Scheinberg, K., and Vicente, L. N. Introduction to Derivative-Free Optimization . SIAM, Philadelphia, PA, 2009.

Devlin, J., Chang, M., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K. BERT: pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT 2019, Minneapolis, MN, USA, June 2-7, 2019, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pp. 4171-4186, 2019.

Dolan, W. B. and Brockett, C. Automatically constructing a corpus of sentential paraphrases. In Proceedings of the Third International Workshop on Paraphrasing, IWP@IJCNLP 2005, Jeju Island, Korea, October 2005, 2005 , 2005.

Fedus, W., Zoph, B., and Shazeer, N. Switch transformers: Scaling to trillion parameter models with simple and efficient sparsity. arXiv:2101.03961 , 2021.

Gao, T., Fisch, A., and Chen, D. Making pre-trained language models better few-shot learners. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, ACL/IJCNLP 2021, (Volume 1: Long Papers), Virtual Event, August 1-6, 2021 , pp. 3816-3830, 2021.

Gu, Y., Han, X., Liu, Z., and Huang, M. PPT: pre-trained prompt tuning for few-shot learning. arXiv:2109.04332 , 2021.

Hambardzumyan, K., Khachatrian, H., and May, J. WARP: word-level adversarial reprogramming. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, ACL/IJCNLP 2021, (Volume 1: Long Papers), Virtual Event, August 1-6, 2021 , pp. 4921-4933, 2021.

Hansen, N. The CMA evolution strategy: A tutorial. arXiv:1604.00772 , 2016.

Hansen, N. and Ostermeier, A. Completely derandomized self-adaptation in evolution strategies. Evol. Comput. , 9 (2):159-195, 2001.

Hansen, N., M¨ uller, S. D., and Koumoutsakos, P. Reducing the time complexity of the derandomized evolution strategy with covariance matrix adaptation (CMA-ES). Evol. Comput. , 11(1):1-18, 2003.

He, J., Zhou, C., Ma, X., Berg-Kirkpatrick, T., and Neubig, G. Towards a unified view of parameter-efficient transfer learning. arXiv:2110.04366 , 2021.

- He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing human-level performance on imagenet classification. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV 2015, Santiago, Chile, December 7-13, 2015 , pp. 1026-1034, 2015.
- Hochreiter, S. and Schmidhuber, J. Long short-term memory. Neural Comput. , 9(8):1735-1780, 1997.
- Houlsby, N., Giurgiu, A., Jastrzebski, S., Morrone, B., de Laroussilhe, Q., Gesmundo, A., Attariyan, M., and Gelly, S. Parameter-efficient transfer learning for NLP. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2019, 9-15 June 2019, Long Beach, California, USA , volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 2790-2799, 2019.
- Hu, E. J., Shen, Y., Wallis, P., Allen-Zhu, Z., Li, Y ., Wang, S., and Chen, W. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv:2106.09685 , 2021a.
- Hu, S., Ding, N., Wang, H., Liu, Z., Li, J., and Sun, M. Knowledgeable prompt-tuning: Incorporating knowledge into prompt verbalizer for text classification. arXiv:2108.02035 , 2021b.
- Hu, Y.-Q., Qian, H., and Yu, Y. Sequential classificationbased optimization for direct policy search. In Proceedings of the 31st AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pp. 2029-2035, San Francisco, CA, 2017.
- Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings , 2015.
- Kolda, T. G., Lewis, R. M., and Torczon, V. Optimization by direct search: New perspectives on some classical and modern methods. SIAM Review , 45(3):385-482, 2003.
- Lester, B., Al-Rfou, R., and Constant, N. The power of scale for parameter-efficient prompt tuning. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2021, Virtual Event / Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, 7-11 November, 2021 , pp. 3045-3059, 2021.
- Letham, B., Calandra, R., Rai, A., and Bakshy, E. Re-examining linear embeddings for high-dimensional Bayesian optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33 , virtual, 2020.
- Lewis, M., Liu, Y., Goyal, N., Ghazvininejad, M., Mohamed, A., Levy, O., Stoyanov, V., and Zettlemoyer, L. BART: denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training for natural language generation, translation, and comprehension. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2020, Online, July 5-10, 2020 , pp. 7871-7880, 2020.
- Li, C., Farkhoor, H., Liu, R., and Yosinski, J. Measuring the intrinsic dimension of objective landscapes. In 6th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30 - May 3, 2018, Conference Track Proceedings , 2018.
- Li, X. L. and Liang, P. Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, ACL/IJCNLP 2021, (Volume 1: Long Papers), Virtual Event, August 1-6, 2021 , pp. 4582-4597, 2021.
- Liu, X., Ji, K., Fu, Y ., Du, Z., Yang, Z., and Tang, J. P-tuning v2: Prompt tuning can be comparable to fine-tuning universally across scales and tasks. arXiv:2110.07602 , 2021a.
- Liu, X., Zheng, Y., Du, Z., Ding, M., Qian, Y., Yang, Z., and Tang, J. GPT understands, too. arXiv:2103.10385 , 2021b.
- Liu, Y., Ott, M., Goyal, N., Du, J., Joshi, M., Chen, D., Levy, O., Lewis, M., Zettlemoyer, L., and Stoyanov, V. Roberta: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining approach. arXiv:1907.11692 , 2019.
- Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., Bradbury, J., Chanan, G., Killeen, T., Lin, Z., Gimelshein, N., Antiga, L., Desmaison, A., K¨ opf, A., Yang, E., DeVito, Z., Raison, M., Tejani, A., Chilamkurthy, S., Steiner, B., Fang, L., Bai, J., and Chintala, S. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada , pp. 8024-8035, 2019.
- Perez, E., Kiela, D., and Cho, K. True few-shot learning with language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021, December 6-14, 2021, virtual , pp. 11054-11070, 2021.
- Peters, M. E., Ruder, S., and Smith, N. A. To tune or not to tune? adapting pretrained representations to diverse tasks. In Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Representation Learning for NLP, RepL4NLP@ACL 2019, Florence, Italy, August 2, 2019 , pp. 7-14, 2019.
- Qian, H., Hu, Y., and Yu, Y. Derivative-free optimization of high-dimensional non-convex functions by sequential random embeddings. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2016, New York, NY, USA, 9-15 July 2016 , pp. 1946-1952, 2016.

- Qin, G. and Eisner, J. Learning how to ask: Querying lms with mixtures of soft prompts. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT 2021, Online, June 6-11, 2021 , pp. 5203-5212, 2021.
- Qin, Y., Wang, X., Su, Y., Lin, Y., Ding, N., Liu, Z., Li, J., Hou, L., Li, P., Sun, M., and Zhou, J. Exploring lowdimensional intrinsic task subspace via prompt tuning. arXiv:2110.07867 , 2021.
- Qiu, X., Sun, T., Xu, Y., Shao, Y., Dai, N., and Huang, X. Pre-trained models for natural language processing: A survey. SCIENCE CHINA Technological Sciences , 2020.
- Raffel, C., Shazeer, N., Roberts, A., Lee, K., Narang, S., Matena, M., Zhou, Y., Li, W., and Liu, P. J. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 21:140:1-140:67, 2020.
- Rios, L. M. and Sahinidis, N. V. Derivative-free optimization: A review of algorithms and comparison of software implementations. Journal of Global Optimization , 56(3): 1247-1293, 2013.
- Salimans, T., Ho, J., Chen, X., Sidor, S., and Sutskever, I. Evolution strategies as a scalable alternative to reinforcement learning. arXiv:1703.03864 , 2017.
- Schick, T. and Sch¨ utze, H. Exploiting cloze-questions for few-shot text classification and natural language inference. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume, EACL 2021, Online, April 19 23, 2021 , pp. 255-269, 2021a.
- Schick, T. and Sch¨ utze, H. It's not just size that matters: Small language models are also few-shot learners. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT 2021, Online, June 6-11, 2021 , pp. 2339-2352, 2021b.
- Schick, T., Schmid, H., and Sch¨ utze, H. Automatically identifying words that can serve as labels for few-shot text classification. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, COLING 2020, Barcelona, Spain (Online), December 8-13, 2020 , pp. 5569-5578, 2020.
- Shahriari, B., Swersky, K., Wang, Z., Adams, R. P., and de Freitas, N. Taking the human out of the loop: A review of Bayesian optimization. Proceedings of the IEEE , 104 (1):148-175, 2016.
- Shin, T., Razeghi, Y., IV , R. L. L., Wallace, E., and Singh, S. Autoprompt: Eliciting knowledge from language models with automatically generated prompts. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2020, Online, November 16-20, 2020 , pp. 4222-4235, 2020.
- Snoek, J., Larochelle, H., and Adams, R. P. Practical Bayesian optimization of machine learning algorithms. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 25 , pp. 2960-2968, Lake Tahoe, NV, 2012.
- Socher, R., Perelygin, A., Wu, J., Chuang, J., Manning, C. D., Ng, A. Y., and Potts, C. Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality over a sentiment treebank. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2013, 18-21 October 2013, Grand Hyatt Seattle, Seattle, Washington, USA, A meeting of SIGDAT, a Special Interest Group of the ACL , pp. 1631-1642, 2013.
- Sun, T., Liu, X., Qiu, X., and Huang, X. Paradigm shift in natural language processing. Machine Intelligence Research , 2022.
- Sun, Y., Wang, S., Feng, S., Ding, S., Pang, C., Shang, J., Liu, J., Chen, X., Zhao, Y ., Lu, Y ., Liu, W., Wu, Z., Gong, W., Liang, J., Shang, Z., Sun, P., Liu, W., Ouyang, X., Yu, D., Tian, H., Wu, H., and Wang, H. ERNIE 3.0: Largescale knowledge enhanced pre-training for language understanding and generation. arXiv:2107.02137 , 2021.
- Wang, A., Singh, A., Michael, J., Hill, F., Levy, O., and Bowman, S. R. GLUE: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. In 7th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019 , 2019.
- Wang, Z., Hutter, F., Zoghi, M., Matheson, D., and de Freitas, N. Bayesian optimization in a billion dimensions via random embeddings. J. Artif. Intell. Res. , 55:361-387, 2016.
- Weston, J. and Watkins, C. Support vector machines for multi-class pattern recognition. In ESANN 1999, 7th European Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks, Bruges, Belgium, April 21-23, 1999, Proceedings , pp. 219-224, 1999.
- Williams, A., Nangia, N., and Bowman, S. R. A broadcoverage challenge corpus for sentence understanding through inference. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT 2018, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, June 1-6, 2018, Volume 1 (Long Papers) , pp. 11121122, 2018.

- Wu, S., Zhao, X., Yu, T., Zhang, R., Shen, C., Liu, H., Li, F., Zhu, H., Luo, J., Xu, L., and Zhang, X. Yuan 1.0: Large-scale pre-trained language model in zero-shot and few-shot learning. arXiv:2110.04725 , 2021.
- Zeng, W., Ren, X., Su, T., Wang, H., Liao, Y., Wang, Z., Jiang, X., Yang, Z., Wang, K., Zhang, X., Li, C., Gong, Z., Yao, Y., Huang, X., Wang, J., Yu, J., Guo, Q., Yu, Y., Zhang, Y., Wang, J., Tao, H., Yan, D., Yi, Z., Peng, F., Jiang, F., Zhang, H., Deng, L., Zhang, Y., Lin, Z., Zhang, C., Zhang, S., Guo, M., Gu, S., Fan, G., Wang, Y., Jin, X., Liu, Q., and Tian, Y. Panguα : Large-scale autoregressive pretrained chinese language models with auto-parallel computation. arXiv:2104.12369 , 2021.
- Zhang, T., Wu, F., Katiyar, A., Weinberger, K. Q., and Artzi, Y. Revisiting few-sample BERT fine-tuning. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021 , 2021a.
- Zhang, X., Zhao, J. J., and LeCun, Y. Character-level convolutional networks for text classification. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 28: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2015, December 7-12, 2015, Montreal, Quebec, Canada , pp. 649-657, 2015a.
- Zhang, Y., Sohn, K., Villegas, R., Pan, G., and Lee, H. Improving object detection with deep convolutional networks via Bayesian optimization and structured prediction. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 249-258, Boston, MA, 2015b.
- Zhang, Z., Han, X., Zhou, H., Ke, P., Gu, Y., Ye, D., Qin, Y., Su, Y., Ji, H., Guan, J., Qi, F., Wang, X., Zheng, Y., Zeng, G., Cao, H., Chen, S., Li, D., Sun, Z., Liu, Z., Huang, M., Han, W., Tang, J., Li, J., Zhu, X., and Sun, M. CPM: A large-scale generative chinese pre-trained language model. arXiv:2012.00413 , 2020.
- Zhang, Z., Gu, Y., Han, X., Chen, S., Xiao, C., Sun, Z., Yao, Y., Qi, F., Guan, J., Ke, P., Cai, Y ., Zeng, G., Tan, Z., Liu, Z., Huang, M., Han, W., Liu, Y., Zhu, X., and Sun, M. CPM-2: large-scale cost-effective pre-trained language models. arXiv:2106.10715 , 2021b.
- Zhong, Z., Friedman, D., and Chen, D. Factual probing is [MASK]: learning vs. learning to recall. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT 2021, Online, June 6-11, 2021 , pp. 5017-5033, 2021.

## A. Additional Experimental Results

Random Projection. The random projection matrix A ∈ R D × d is a key factor that determines whether and how hard it is to find a good solution in the generated subspace. Here we compare two design choices of setting A : The first choice is commonly used in previous high-dimensional derivative-free optimization work (Wang et al., 2016; Qian et al., 2016), that is setting each entry of A by sampling from a normal distribution. Following Qian et al. (2016), we use N (0 , 1 /d ) where d is the subspace dimensionality 5 . The second choice is setting each entry of A by sampling from a uniform distribution, which is widely used for initializing linear layers in modern neural networks. Here we use the uniform distribution proposed in He et al. (2015). As shown in Figure 4, both random projections can achieve a considerable cross entropy loss on SST-2 and AG's News within reasonable budgets but faster convergence is obtained using uniform distribution.

Figure 4. Effect of random projection A .

<!-- image -->

Population Size. In each iteration of the CMA-ES, a population of solutions are sampled from a multivariate normal distribution model. The evaluation of the population is then used to update the parameters of the multivariate normal distribution model. Here we study the effect of the population size on SST-2. In our experiments, we sequentially evaluate each solution in a population, and therefore larger population size will result in more API calls given the same CMA-ES iterations. As shown in Figure 5, smaller population size confers faster convergence in terms of number of API calls. We also demonstrate the comparison in terms of the CMA-ES iterations, which can be found in the following section.

Figure 5. Effect of population size λ .

<!-- image -->

5 We also tried N (0 , 1) as used in Wang et al. (2016), which does not work in our case. For N (0 , 1 /d ) , we adopt a larger search space Z instead of [ -5 , 5] d to get it work.

Figure 7. Optimization in low-dimensional subspaces using CMA-ES and Adam.

<!-- image -->

Ablation of Subspace Dimensionality and Prompt Length in 16-shot Setting. In § 4.3, we conduct ablation experiments in the 64-shot setting to reduce the variance over different runs. To keep consistent with the experimental setting in Table 3, we demonstrate in Figure 6 the ablation results on subspace dimensionality and prompt length in the 16-shot setting.

CMA-ES vs. Adam in Subspaces. In Figure 3, we compare the convergence of prompt tuning (with Adam optimizer) and black-box tuning (with CMA-ES), where Adam performs optimization in the original prompt space ( P ) while CMA-ES performs in the generated subsapce ( Z ). Here we also compare the effectiveness and efficiency of Adam and CMA-ES in subspaces. As shown in Figure 7, CMA-ES is more efficient and stable than Adam in low-dimensional subspaces. When the dimensionality of the subsapce becomes large (e.g., d = 1000 ), Adam with a appropriate learning rate can perform on par with CMA-ES. Note that CMA-ES does not require back-propagation, so the computation cost of one iteration for CMA-ES and Adam can be very different. For fair comparison, we convert the number of iterations into FLOPs. The FLOPs of one iteration of Adam is estimated to be three times greater than CMA-ES.

## B. Parallel Evaluation

If the training data is smaller, or the server allows larger batches, a promising way to improve training efficiency is to use parallel evaluation. That is, we can evaluate the entire population in parallel, as depicted in Figure 8(a). As demonstrated in Figure 8(b), we can achieve 100% accuracy on the SST-2 training set with population size of 20 and 25 in 300 iterations (API calls). In case of the batch size per API call is limited, we can also use asynchronous queries to simulate the parallel evaluation.

## C. Estimation of Uploaded/Downloaded Data Size

In this section we describe how we estimate the amount of data to be uploaded and downloaded (Table 4).

For black-box tuning, there are two kinds of data to be uploaded: (1) training samples, and (2) continuous prompt. A training sample is comprised of two parts: input ids and attention mask . We can use the unsigned short (representation range: 0 ∼ 65535, 2 bytes per value) for input ids and use the bool type (1 byte per value) for attention mask . For continuous prompt, which contains hundreds of values, we can use the float type (4 bytes per value) for representation.

Figure 8. (a) Illustration of the parallel evaluation. (b) Comparison of the convergence rate with different population sizes using parallel evaluation.

<!-- image -->

Take SST-2 16-shot split as an example, the input ids and attention mask are in shape of 32 × 47 , where 32 is the batch size and 47 is the maximum sequence length, so there are ∼ 2.9KB data for input ids and ∼ 1.5KB data for attention mask . Assume the prompt is 500-dimensional, we need to upload additional ∼ 2KB data for prompt. The data to be downloaded is the output logits of the candidate words, which is a dictionary containing | Y | fl oat values. Take SST-2 16-shot split as an example, the size of data to be downloaded is 32 × 2 × 4 bytes = 0 . 25 KB.

For feature-based methods we use similar estimation methods. The data size for upload is the same for Feature-MLP and Feature-BiLSTM. The data to be downloaded for Feature-MLP is the representation of the [CLS] token while the data to be downloaded for Feature-BiLSTM is the representation of all the tokens. Note that this estimation, without any data compression, is an upper bound of the real scenario.